Food Sanitation Rules
Effective Date: June 24, 2024
Table of Contents
OAR 333-150 Food Sanitation Rule 1
OAR 333-157 Inspection and Licensing Procedures 89
OAR 333-158 Combination Food Service Facilities 94
OAR 333-160 Destruction of Food Unfit for Human Consumption 95
OAR 333-162 Mobile Units, Commissaries and Warehouses 96
Annex
Form 1 Applicant and Food Employee Interview 101
Form 2 Food Employee Reporting Agreement 102
Inspectional Guides
Food Code Inspectional Guide 103
Index 108
The official copy of an Oregon Administrative Rule is contained in the Administrative
Order filed at the Archives Division, 800 Summer St. NE, Salem, Oregon 97310. Any
discrepancies with the published version are satisfied in favor of the Administrative
Order. The Oregon Administrative Rules and the Oregon Bulletin are copyrighted by the
Oregon Secretary of State, Terms and Conditions of Use.
If you need this in an alternate format, please contact 971-673-0451.
2
OREGON HEALTH AUTHORITY
DIVISION 150
FOOD SANITATION RULE
Introduction
Authority, Purpose, Incorporation
by Reference, and Deletions
(1) Authority and Purpose.
This rule establishes definitions, sets standards for management and personnel, food protection, and equipment and facilities,
water supply, sewage disposal, provides for food establishment plan review, and employee restriction to safeguard public
health and provide consumers food that is safe, unadulterated, and honestly presented.
(2) Incorporation by Reference.
The requirements in the U.S. Public Health Service, Food and Drug Administration (FDA), Food Code 2009, Chapters 1
through 8 are adopted and incorporated by reference. The Food Code is available at https://fda.gov/food/fda-food-code/food-
code-2009.
NOTE: The structural nomenclature of the document is as follows:
Chapter 9
Part 9-1
Subpart 9-101
Section (§) 9-101.11
Paragraph (¶) 9-101.11(A)
Subparagraph 9-101.11(A)(1)
(3) Deletions.
The following sections, paragraphs or subparagraphs of the 1999 FDA Food Code are deleted in their entirety: 2-
102.11(C)(8)(b), 2-102.20, 2-103.11(K), 3-202.18(A)(1)(a)-(e), 4-301.12(C)(5), (D) and (E), 4-501.115, 4-603.16(B) and (C),
4-603.17, 8-302.11, 8-302.14(E), 8-401.10(B), 8-401.20, 8-402.20(A)(3), 8-402.40, 8-406.11, 8-501.40 and Annex 1 through
8.
Chapter 1
Purpose and Definitions
Parts
1-1 TITLE, INTENT, SCOPE
1-2 DEFINITIONS
Subparts: 1-101 Title
1-102 Intent
1-103 Scope
1-101.10 Food Code.
These provisions shall be known as the Food Code, hereinafter referred to as “this Code.”
1-102.10 Food Safety, Illness Prevention, and Honest Presentation.
The purpose of this Code is to safeguard public health and provide to consumers food that is safe, unadulterated, and honestly
presented.
1
1-103.10 Statement.
This Code establishes definitions; sets standards for management and personnel, food operations, and equipment and
facilities; and provides for food establishment plan review, permit issuance, inspection, employee restriction, and permit
suspension.
2

1-2 DEFINITIONS
Subpart: 1-201 Applicability and Terms Defined
1-201.10 Statement of Application and Listing of Terms.
(A) The following definitions apply in the interpretation and application of this Code.
(B) Terms Defined.
Accredited program.
(1) "Accredited program" means a food protection manager certification program that has been
evaluated and listed by an accrediting agency as conforming to national standards for organizations that
certify individuals or approved by the Oregon Health Authority (Authority) or the Oregon Department of
Agriculture.
(2) "Accredited program" refers to the certification process and is a designation based upon an
independent evaluation of factors such as the sponsor's mission; organizational structure; staff resources;
revenue sources; policies; public information regarding program scope, eligibility requirements, re-
certification, discipline and grievance procedures; and test development and administration.
(3) "Accredited program" does not refer to training functions or educational programs.
Additive.
(1) "Food additive" has the meaning stated in the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act, § 201(s) and 21 CFR
170.3(e)(1).
(2) "Color additive" has the meaning stated in the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act, § 201(t) and 21 CFR
70.3(f).
"Adulterated" has the meaning stated in the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act, § 402.
"Approved" means acceptable to the regulatory authority based on a determination of conformity with principles,
practices, and generally recognized standards that protect public health.
“Assembly” means the act of putting together foods that do not require further preparation. This includes, but is not
limited to, placing a hot dog on a bun, or placing beans, lettuce and cheese on a tortilla.
Asymptomatic.
(1) "Asymptomatic" means without obvious symptoms; not showing or producing indications of a disease or other
medical condition, such as an individual infected with a pathogen but not exhibiting or producing any signs or
symptoms of vomiting, diarrhea, or jaundice.
(2) "Asymptomatic" includes not showing symptoms because symptoms have resolved or subsided, or because
symptoms never manifested.
“Authority” means the Oregon Health Authority.
"aw" means water activity which is a measure of the free moisture in a food, is the quotient of the water vapor pressure
of the substance divided by the vapor pressure of pure water at the same temperature, and is indicated by the symbol a .
w
"Balut" means an embryo inside a fertile egg that has been incubated for a period sufficient for the embryo to reach a
specific stage of development after which it is removed from incubation before hatching.
“Base of Operation” means the licensed restaurant, commissary or warehouse that services a mobile unit or vending
operation.
“Benevolent Meal Site” means:
(1) A periodic food service operation run by a benevolent organization that provides food to the needy or indigent
without charge; and
(2) The meal service does not operate from a permanent kitchen facility.
"Beverage" means a liquid for drinking, including water.
"Bottled drinking water" means water that is sealed in bottles, packages, or other containers and offered for sale for
human consumption, including bottled mineral water.
2
"Casing" means a tubular container for sausage products made of either natural or artificial (synthetic) material.
“Catering” means the preparation of food in an approved food establishment and the transportation of the food for
service and consumption at some other site.
"Certification number" means a unique combination of letters and numbers assigned by a shellfish control authority to
a molluscan shellfish dealer according to the provisions of the National Shellfish Sanitation Program.
"CFR" means Code of Federal Regulations. Citations in this Code to the CFR refer sequentially to the Title, Part, and
Section numbers, such as 40 CFR 180.194 refers to Title 40, Part 180, Section 194.
“CIP”
(1) "CIP" means cleaned in place by the circulation or flowing by mechanical means through a piping system of a
detergent solution, water rinse, and sanitizing solution onto or over equipment surfaces that require cleaning, such as
the method used, in part, to clean and sanitize a frozen dessert machine.
(2) "CIP" does not include the cleaning of equipment such as band saws, slicers, or mixers that are subjected to in-
place manual cleaning without the use of a CIP system.
“Close” means to summarily stop the operation of a food establishment pursuant to ORS 624.073 and ORS 624.370.
“Code” shall have the same meaning as administrative rule.
“Combination Food Service Establishment” means any food establishment located within a single structure or at a
single site, and which is engaged in activities subject to licensing or inspecting requirements of both the Authority and
the Oregon Department of Agriculture, and the regulated activities are common to the same operator.
“Commercial warewashing machine” means a machine designed and manufactured specifically for use in a food
service establishment such as a restaurant and not for domestic or light-commercial purposes.
"Commingle" means:
(1) To combine shellstock harvested on different days or from different growing areas as identified on the tag or
label, or
(2) To combine shucked shellfish from containers with different container codes or different shucking dates.
Comminuted.
(1) "Comminuted" means reduced in size by methods including chopping, flaking, grinding, or mincing.
(2) "Comminuted" includes fish or meat products that are reduced in size and restructured or reformulated such as
gefilte fish, gyros, ground beef, and sausage; and a mixture of 2 or more types of meat that have been reduced in
size and combined, such as sausages made from 2 or more meats.
“Commissary” means a commissary catering establishment, restaurant, or any other place in which, food, beverage,
ingredients, containers, or supplies are kept, handled, packaged, prepared or stored, and from which vending machines or
mobile units are serviced. A licensed commissary may only be used for catering if licensed mobile food units or vending
machines are serviced by the establishment as specified in ORS 624.310.
“Complete Inspection” means any inspection conducted at the election of the licensing agency evaluating all items on
the inspection form.
"Confection" means candy or sweets, including, but not limited to, salted caramel, fudge, marshmallow bars, chocolate
covered marshmallows, and hard candy.
“Convenience store” means a business that, for compensation, offers or provides a range of commodities that includes
food and beverages as it relates to plastic straws.
"Conditional employee" means a potential food employee to whom a job offer is made, conditional on responses to
subsequent medical questions or examinations designed to identify potential food employees who may be suffering from
a disease that can be transmitted through food and done in compliance with Title 1 of the Americans with Disabilities
Act of 1990.
3
"Confirmed disease outbreak" means a foodborne disease outbreak in which laboratory analysis of appropriate
specimens identifies a causative agent and epidemiological analysis implicates the food as the source of the illness.
"Consumer" means a person who is a member of the public, takes possession of food, is not functioning in the capacity
of an operator of a food establishment or food processing plant, and does not offer the food for resale.
Core Item.
(1) "Core item" means a provision in this Code that is not designated as a priority item or a priority foundation
item.
(2) "Core item" includes an item that usually relates to general sanitation, operational controls, sanitation standard
operating procedures (SSOPs), facilities or structures, equipment design, or general maintenance.
"Corrosion-resistant material" means a material that maintains acceptable surface cleanability characteristics under
prolonged influence of the food to be contacted, the normal use of cleaning compounds and sanitizing solutions, and
other conditions of the use environment.
"Counter-mounted equipment" means equipment that is not portable and is designed to be mounted off the floor on a
table, counter, or shelf.
"Critical control point" means a point or procedure in a specific food system where loss of control may result in an
unacceptable health risk.
"Critical limit" means the maximum or minimum value to which a physical, biological, or chemical parameter must be
controlled at a critical control point to minimize the risk that the identified food safety hazard may occur.
"Cut leafy greens" means fresh leafy greens whose leaves have been cut, shredded, sliced, chopped, or torn. The term
"leafy greens" includes iceberg lettuce, romaine lettuce, leaf lettuce, butter lettuce, baby leaf lettuce (i.e., immature
lettuce or leafy greens), escarole, endive, spring mix, spinach, cabbage, kale, arugula and chard. The term "leafy greens"
does not include herbs such as cilantro or parsley. The term “cut” does not mean removing and discarding exterior
leaves.
"Dealer" means a person who is authorized by a shellfish control authority for the activities of shellstock shipper,
shucker-packer, repacker, reshipper, or depuration processor of molluscan shellfish according to the provisions of the
National Shellfish Sanitation Program.
“Director” means the Director of the Oregon Health Authority or the Oregon Department of Agriculture or authorized
representative.
"Disclosure" means a written statement that clearly identifies the animal-derived foods which are, or can be ordered,
raw, undercooked, or without otherwise being processed to eliminate pathogens, or items that contain an ingredient that
is raw, undercooked, or without otherwise being processed to eliminate pathogens.
Drinking Water.
(1) "Drinking water" means water that meets 40 CFR 141 National Primary Drinking Water Regulations.
(2) "Drinking water" is traditionally known as "potable water."
(3) "Drinking water" includes the term "water" except where the term used connotes that the water is not potable,
such as "boiler water," "mop water," "rainwater," "wastewater," and "nondrinking" water.
"Dry storage area " means a room or area designated for the storage of packaged or containerized bulk food that is not
potentially hazardous (time/temperature control for safety food) and dry goods such as single-service items.
Easily Cleanable.
(1) "Easily cleanable" means a characteristic of a surface that:
(a) Allows effective removal of soil by normal cleaning methods;
(b) Is dependent on the material, design, construction, and installation of the surface; and
(c) Varies with the likelihood of the surface's role in introducing pathogenic or toxigenic agents or other
contaminants into food based on the surface's approved placement, purpose, and use.
4
(2) "Easily cleanable" includes a tiered application of the criteria that qualify the surface as easily cleanable as
specified under Subparagraph (1) of this definition to different situations in which varying degrees of cleanability
are required such as:
(a) The appropriateness of stainless steel for a food preparation surface as opposed to the lack of need for
stainless steel to be used for floors or for tables used for consumer dining; or
(b) The need for a different degree of cleanability for a utilitarian attachment or accessory in the kitchen as
opposed to a decorative attachment or accessory in the consumer dining area.
"Easily movable" means:
(1) Portable; mounted on casters, gliders, or rollers; or provided with a mechanical means to safely tilt a unit of
equipment for cleaning; and
(2) Having no utility connection, a utility connection that disconnects quickly, or a flexible utility connection line of
sufficient length to allow the equipment to be moved for cleaning of the equipment and adjacent area.
Egg.
(1) "Egg" means the shell egg of avian species such as chicken, duck, goose, guinea, quail, ratites or turkey.
(2) "Egg” does not include:
(a) A balut;
(b) The egg of reptile species such as alligator; or
(c) An egg product.
"Employee" means the permit holder, person in charge, person having supervisory or management duties, person on the
payroll, family member, volunteer, person performing work under contractual agreement, or other person working in a
food establishment.
“Enforcement officer” means an authorized representative that conducts inspections as defined in ORS chapter 616 and
ORS chapter 624 as it relates to plastic straws.
"Enterohemorrhagic Escherichia coli" (EHEC) means E. coli which cause hemorrhagic colitis, meaning bleeding
enterically or bleeding from the intestine. The term is typically used in association with E. coli that have the capacity to
produce Shiga toxins and to cause attaching and effacing lesions in the intestine. EHEC is a subset of STEC, whose
members produce additional virulence factors. Infections with EHEC may be asymptomatic but are classically associated
with bloody diarrhea (hemorrhagic colitis) and hemolytic uremic syndrome (HUS) or thrombotic thrombocytopenic
purpura (TTP). Examples of serotypes of EHEC include: E. coli O157:H7; E. coli O157:NM; E. coli O26:H11; E. coli
O145:NM; E. coli O103:H2; or E. coli O111:NM. Also see Shiga toxin-producing E. COLI.
"EPA" means the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.
Equipment.
(1) "Equipment" means an article that is used in the operation of a food establishment such as a freezer, grinder,
hood, ice maker, meat block, mixer, oven, reach-in refrigerator, scale, sink, slicer, stove, table, temperature
measuring device for ambient air, vending machine, or warewashing machine.
(2) "Equipment" does not include apparatuses used for handling or storing large quantities of packaged foods that
are received from a supplier in a cased or overwrapped lot, such as hand trucks, forklifts, dollies, pallets, racks, and
skids.
"Exclude" means to prevent a person from working as an employee in a food establishment or entering a food
establishment as an employee.
"FDA" means the U.S. Food and Drug Administration.
Fish.
(1) "Fish" means fresh or saltwater finfish, crustaceans and other forms of aquatic life (including alligator, frog,
aquatic turtle, jellyfish, sea cucumber, and sea urchin and the roe of such animals) other than birds or mammals, and
all mollusks, if such animal life is intended for human consumption.
(2) "Fish" includes an edible human food product derived in whole or in part from fish, including fish that have
been processed in any manner.
5
"Food" means a raw, cooked, or processed edible substance, ice, beverage, or ingredient used or intended for use or for
sale in whole or in part for human consumption, or chewing gum.
“Food and beverage provider” means a business that, for compensation, offers or serves food or beverages to a
consumer as it relates to plastic straws. A food and beverage provider does not include a health care facility, as defined
in ORS 442.015, or a residential care facility, as defined in ORS 443.400, that provides single-use straws to patients or
residents.
"Foodborne disease outbreak" means the occurrence of two or more cases of a similar illness resulting from the
ingestion of a common food.
"Food-contact surface" means:
(1) A surface of equipment or a utensil with which food normally comes into contact; or
(2) A surface of equipment or a utensil from which food may drain, drip, or splash:
(a) Into a food, or
(b) Onto a surface normally in contact with food.
"Food employee" means an individual working with unpackaged food, food equipment or utensils, or food-contact
surfaces.
"Food establishment" means:
(1) An operation that prepares, assembles, packages, serves, stores, vends, or otherwise provides food for human
consumption; or
(2) Any room, building, structure or place, used or intended for use, or operated for storing, preparing,
compounding, manufacturing, processing, freezing, packaging, distributing, handling, salvaging or displaying food;
or
(3) The ground upon which such place or business is operated or used and so much ground adjacent thereto as is also
used in carrying on the business of the establishment. The Authority or Department of Agriculture may prescribe
additional areas or places which, although they may not be contiguous or adjacent to the above area or
establishment, may be included therein; or
(4) Vehicles, machinery, equipment, utensils, tools, fixtures, implements, and all other articles or items, used in
operating or carrying on the business of a food establishment.
"Food establishment regulated by the Oregon Health Authority” includes but is not limited to:
(1) Bars, bed and breakfast facilities, cafeterias if open to the public, catered feeding locations, caterers, coffee
shops, commissaries, conveyance used to transport people, hospitals if open to the public, hotels, microbreweries,
motels, private clubs if open to the public, restaurants, satellite sites, senior citizen centers, snack bars, taverns,
vending locations, warehouses (associated with a mobile food unit), or similar food facilities.
(2) An operation that is conducted in a mobile food unit, temporary food establishments, or permanent facility or
location; where consumption is on or off premises; and regardless of whether there is a charge for the food.
(3) The premises of a fraternal, social, or religious organization where food is prepared for the public.
(4) School food service that is provided by a private person, business, or organization; and that serve persons other
than enrolled students, invited guests or staff.
(5) That relinquishes possession of food to a consumer directly through a restaurant takeout order.
“Food establishment regulated by the Oregon Department of Agriculture” includes but is not limited to:
(1) Markets, food banks, warehouses (distribution), wineries, microbreweries, grocery stores or other food facilities;
(2) An establishment that predominantly sells foods that are not for immediate consumption, such as take and bake
pizza, whole pies and cakes, loaves of bread, and pre-made dinners that must be cooked or reheated;
(3) An establishment that offers only prepackaged or bulk foods that are not potentially hazardous;
(4) A produce stand that offers fresh fruits and vegetables;
(5) A food processing plant;
(6) Mobile food units that are operated by an Oregon Department of Agriculture licensed establishment and located
on the property of the Oregon Department of Agriculture licensed establishment;
(7) Outdoor cooking and beverage dispensing area operated by a market that is located on the property of the market
and is under the jurisdiction of the Oregon Department of Agriculture; or
(8) Food prepared in a private home that is licensed as a domestic processor.
6
"Food establishment" does not include:
(1) A private home where food is prepared or served for family and guests, and where the public is not invited.
(2) A private home that receives catered or home-delivered food.
(3) An establishment or organization that prepares or sells the following food items for immediate consumption
only:
(a) Non-potentially hazardous confections;
(b) Commercially prepackaged ice cream and frozen desserts sold in individual servings;
(c) Commercially pickled products, commercially processed jerky, nuts, nutmeats, popcorn, and prepackaged
foods such as potato chips, pretzels, and crackers;
(d) Unopened commercially bottled and canned non-potentially hazardous beverages to include alcoholic
beverages;
(e) Coffee and tea, with non-potentially hazardous ingredients;
(f) Non-potentially hazardous hot or cold beverages prepared from individually packaged powdered mixes and
commercially bottled water, not to include fresh squeezed juice;
(g) Non-potentially hazardous foods or beverages provided by a non-food service business or organization as a
courtesy for no charge to customers; and
(h) Other food items as determined by the Authority or the Oregon Department of Agriculture.
(4) An establishment or organization that prepares or sells only non-potentially hazardous food items for immediate
consumption at an event if:
(a) Food employees do not contact exposed, ready-to-eat food with their bare hands and use suitable utensils
such as deli tissue, spatulas, tongs, single-use gloves, or dispensing equipment;
(b) A handwashing facility that complies with 5-203.11 is provided;
(c) A notice is posted in public view that states: "NOTICE: Food served at this location may not have been
inspected by the regulatory authority" or similar language that has been approved by the regulatory authority;
(d) All ingredients, including water and ice, are from an approved source and the product is produced using safe
food handling practices;
(e) The establishment vends raw citrus juices that are expressed at the event location and prepared and sold only
for immediate consumption in individual servings. The establishment may add only non-potentially hazardous,
commercially processed ingredients to the juice, not to include other fresh fruits or vegetables. If raw citrus
juice is sold or served that has not been specifically processed to prevent, reduce, or eliminate the presence of
pathogens, the following notice must be provided, "NOTICE: This product has not been pasteurized or
processed". An establishment that vends raw juices other than raw citrus juice at an event must obtain a
temporary restaurant license; and
(f) An Exempt Foods Agreement Form is completed and kept at the event location during all hours of operation;
(g) The regulatory authority may require a food establishment license if there are food safety concerns
associated with an exempt food service operation.
(5) Private vehicles used for home deliveries.
(6) Personal chef who prepares food for an individual or private party.
(7) Continental breakfast served by a traveler’s accommodation licensed under ORS chapter 446 and that is limited
to the following: individual or bulk dispensed containers of commercially prepared juices; commercially prepared
non-potentially hazardous pastries; whole uncut fresh fruit with peel, and coffee and tea with non-potentially
hazardous ingredients.
(8) A beverage dispensing unit, operating in conjunction with and on the same premises as a facility with a licensed
restaurant that vends beverages to customers participating in an activity at that facility. These beverage dispensing
units cannot vend to members of the public that are not participating in an activity at the facility. Examples include
beverage carts operating at stadiums, golf courses and hotel conferences. The beverages must be served in
containers that are either single service articles or multi-use containers that are not refilled.
(9) School food service that provides food only to students, teachers, other school staff, and invited guests.
(10) Any person holding a "one-day, special retail beer or special retail wine license" for a private residence; or
anyone who possesses a "temporary" license from the Oregon Liquor Control Commission who serves alcoholic
beverages to the public, but serves only foods exempted under 1-201.10(B) of the 2009 FDA Food Code and uses
single-service articles.
(11) A bed and breakfast facility with two or less rooms for rent on a daily basis.
(12) Home delivery of grocery orders.
(13) Institutions that do not serve the public.
(14) Produce stands located on a farmer’s own property wherein only produce grown by the farmer is sold and no
food processing is done as specified in OAR 603-025-0030(2).
(15) Farm Direct Marketers as defined in OAR 603-025-0225(6),
7
(16) A domestic processor licensed by the Oregon Department of Agriculture that sells only prepackaged and
labeled food at a farmer’s market.
(17) A food operation in a residential dwelling that sells only baked goods or confectionary items under the
provisions of OAR 603-025-0320.
“Food processing plant" means a commercial operation or a domestic kitchen licensed by the Oregon Department of
Agriculture that manufactures, packages, labels, or stores food for human consumption.
Game Animal.
(1) "Game animal" means an animal, the products of which are food, that is not classified as livestock, sheep,
swine, goat, horse, mule, or other equine in 9 CFR 301.2 Definitions, or as Poultry or Fish.
(2) "Game animal" includes mammals such as reindeer, elk, deer, antelope, water buffalo, bison, rabbit, squirrel,
opossum, raccoon, nutria, or muskrat, and nonaquatic reptiles such as land snakes.
(3) "Game animal" does not include ratites.
"General use pesticide" means a pesticide that is not classified by EPA for restricted use as specified in 40 CFR
152.175 Pesticides classified for restricted use.
"Grade A standards" means the requirements of the United States Public Health Service/FDA "Grade A Pasteurized
Milk Ordinance" with which certain fluid and dry milk and milk products comply.
"HACCP plan" means a written document that delineates the formal procedures for following the Hazard Analysis
Critical Control Point principles developed by The National Advisory Committee on Microbiological Criteria for Foods.
Handwashing Sink.
(1) "Handwashing sink" means a lavatory, a basin or vessel for washing, a wash basin, or a plumbing fixture
especially placed for use in personal hygiene and designed for the washing of the hands.
(2) "Handwashing sink" includes an automatic handwashing facility.
"Hazard" means a biological, chemical, or physical property that may cause an unacceptable consumer health risk.
"Health practitioner" means a physician licensed to practice medicine, or if allowed by law, a nurse practitioner,
physician assistant, or similar medical professional.
"Hermetically sealed container" means a container that is designed and intended to be secure against the entry of
microorganisms and, in the case of low acid canned foods, to maintain the commercial sterility of its contents after
processing.
"Highly susceptible population" means persons who are more likely than other people in the general population to
experience foodborne disease because they are:
(1) Immunocompromised; preschool age children, or older adults; and
(2) Obtaining food at a facility that provides services such as custodial care, health care, or assisted living, such as
child or adult day care center, kidney dialysis center, hospital or nursing home, or nutritional or socialization
services such as a senior center.
"Imminent health hazard" means a significant threat or danger to health that is considered to exist when there is
evidence sufficient to show that a product, practice, circumstance, or event creates a situation that requires immediate
correction or cessation of operation to prevent injury based on:
(1) The number of potential injuries, and
(2) The nature, severity, and duration of the anticipated injury.
"Injected" means manipulating meat to which a solution has been introduced into its interior by processes that are
referred to as "injecting," "pump marinating," or "stitch pumping”.
“Integral” means that all equipment associated with a mobile unit must be rigidly and physically attached to the unit
without restricting the mobility of the unit while in transit.
Juice.
8
(1) "Juice" means the aqueous liquid expressed or extracted from one or more fruits or vegetables, purées of the
edible portions of one or more fruits or vegetables, or any concentrates of such liquid or purée.
(2) "Juice” does not include, for purposes of HACCP, liquids, purées, or concentrates that are not used as
beverages or ingredients of beverages.
"Kitchenware" means food preparation and storage utensils.
"Law" means applicable local, state, and federal statutes, regulations, and ordinances.
“License” means the same as permit for the purposes of this rule.
“License holder” means the same as permit holder for the purposes of this rule.
"Linens" means fabric items such as cloth hampers, cloth napkins, tablecloths, wiping cloths, and work garments
including cloth gloves.
Major Food Allergen.
(1) "Major food allergen" means:
(a) Milk, egg, fish (such as bass, flounder, cod, and including crustacean shellfish such as crab, lobster, or
shrimp), tree nuts (such as almonds, pecans, or walnuts), wheat, peanuts, and soybeans; or
(b) A food ingredient that contains protein derived from a food, as specified in Subparagraph (1)(a) of this
definition.
(2) "Major food allergen" does not include:
(a) Any highly refined oil derived from a food specified in Subparagraph (1)(a) of this definition and any
ingredient derived from such highly refined oil; or
(b) Any ingredient that is exempt under the petition or notification process specified in the Food Allergen
Labeling and Consumer Protection Act of 2004 (Public Law 108-282).
"Maximum Contaminant Level (MCL)" means the maximum allowable level of a contaminant in water for
consumption delivered to the users of a system, except in the case of turbidity where the maximum allowable level is
measured at the point of entry to the distribution system.
"Meat" means the flesh of animals used as food including the dressed flesh of cattle, swine, sheep, or goats and other
edible animals, except fish, poultry, and animals as specified under Subparagraphs 3-201.17(A)(3), (4) and (5).
Mechanically Tenderized.
(1) "Mechanically tenderized" means manipulating meat with deep penetration by processes which may be
referred to as "blade tenderizing," "jaccarding," "pinning," "needling," or using blades, pins, needles or any
mechanical device.
(2) "Mechanically tenderized" does not include processes by which solutions are injected into meat.
"mg/L" means milligrams per liter, which is the metric equivalent of parts per million (ppm).
“Mobile Food Unit” means any vehicle that is self-propelled or that can be pulled or pushed down a sidewalk, street,
highway or waterway, on which food is prepared, processed or converted or which is used in selling and dispensing food
to the ultimate consumer.
"Molluscan shellfish" means any edible species of fresh or frozen oysters, clams, mussels, and scallops or edible
portions thereof, except when the scallop product consists only of the shucked adductor muscle.
Non-Continuous Cooking.
(1) "Non-continuous cooking" means the cooking of food in a food establishment using a process in which the
initial heating of the food is intentionally halted so that it may be cooled and held for complete cooking at a later
time prior to sale or service.
(2) "Non-continuous cooking" does not include cooking procedures that only involve temporarily interrupting or
slowing an otherwise continuous cooking process.
9
“Outdoor Beverage Dispensing Operation” means an outdoor area on the premises of a food establishment where
beverages are dispensed to consumers.
"Outdoor Cooking Operation" means an outdoor area on the premises of a food establishment where food is cooked
for service to consumers.
Packaged.
(1) "Packaged" means bottled, canned, cartoned, securely bagged, or securely wrapped, whether packaged in a
food establishment or a food processing plant.
(2) "Packaged" does not include a wrapper, carry-out box, or other nondurable container used to containerize
food with the purpose of facilitating food protection during service and receipt of the food by the consumer.
"Permit" means the document issued by the regulatory authority that authorizes a person to operate a food
establishment.
"Permit holder" means the entity that:
(1) Is legally responsible for the operation of the food establishment such as the owner, the owner's agent, or other
person; and
(2) Possesses a valid permit to operate a food establishment.
"Person" means an association, a corporation, individual, partnership, other legal entity, government, or governmental
subdivision or agency.
"Person in charge" means the individual present at a food establishment who is responsible for the operation at the
time of inspection.
Personal Care Items.
(1) "Personal care items" means items or substances that may be poisonous, toxic, or a source of contamination
and are used to maintain or enhance a person's health, hygiene, or appearance.
(2) "Personal care items" include items such as medicines; first aid supplies; and other items such as cosmetics,
and toiletries such as toothpaste and mouthwash.
“Personal Chef” means an individual that provides cooking services to private individuals or private groups. A
personal chef may purchase food from an approved source, but may not store or prepare food in advance. A personal
chef may use their own equipment, utensils and spices.
"pH" means the symbol for the negative logarithm of the hydrogen ion concentration, which is a measure of the degree
of acidity or alkalinity of a solution. Values between 0 and 7 indicate acidity and values between 7 and 14 indicate
alkalinity. The value for pure distilled water is 7, which is considered neutral.
"Physical facilities" means the structure and interior surfaces of a food establishment including accessories such as soap
and towel dispensers and attachments such as light fixtures and heating or air conditioning system vents.
"Plumbing fixture" means a receptacle or device that:
(1) Is permanently or temporarily connected to the water distribution system of the premises and demands a supply
of water from the system; or
(2) Discharges used water, waste materials, or sewage directly or indirectly to the drainage system of the premises.
"Plumbing system" means the water supply and distribution pipes; plumbing fixtures and traps; soil, waste, and vent
pipes; sanitary and storm sewers and building drains, including their respective connections, devices, and appurtenances
within the premises; and water-treating equipment.
"Poisonous or toxic materials" means substances that are not intended for ingestion and are included in 4 categories:
(1) Cleaners and sanitizers, which include cleaning and sanitizing agents and agents such as caustics, acids, drying
agents, polishes, and other chemicals;
(2) Pesticides, except sanitizers, which include substances such as insecticides and rodenticides;
(3) Substances necessary for the operation and maintenance of the establishment such as nonfood grade lubricants
and personal care items that may be deleterious to health; and
10
(4) Substances that are not necessary for the operation and maintenance of the establishment and are on the premises
for retail sale, such as petroleum products and paints.
Potentially Hazardous Food (Time/Temperature Control for Safety Food).
(1) "Potentially hazardous food (time/temperature control for safety food)" means a food that requires
time/temperature control for safety (TCS) to limit pathogenic microorganism growth or toxin formation.
(2) "Potentially hazardous food (time/temperature control for safety food)" includes:
(a) An animal food that is raw or heat-treated; a plant food that is heat-treated or consists of raw seed sprouts,
Table A. Interaction of pH and AW for control of spores in food heat-treated to destroy vegetative cells and subsequently
packaged
AW values PH values
4.6 or less > 4.6 - 5.6 > 5.6
≤0.92 non-PHF*/non-TCS FOOD** non-PHF/non-TCS FOOD non-PHF/non-TCS FOOD
>0.92 - .95 non-PHF/non-TCS FOOD non-PHF/non-TCS FOOD PA***
>0.95 non-PHF/non-TCS FOOD PA PA
* PHF means Potentially Hazardous Food
** TCS food means Time/Temperature Control for Safety Food
*** PA means Product Assessment required
cut melons, cut leafy greens, cut tomatoes or mixtures of cut tomatoes that are not modified in a way so that
they are unable to support pathogenic microorganism growth or toxin formation, or garlic-in-oil mixtures that
are not modified in a way so that they are unable to support pathogenic microorganism growth or toxin
Table B. Interaction of pH and AW for control of vegetative cells and spores in food not heat-treated or heat-treated but not
packaged
AW values PH values
<4.2 4.2 - 4.6 >4.6 - 5.0 >5.0
<0.88 non-PHF*/ non-TCS food** non-PHF/ non-TCS food non-PHF/ non-TCS food non-PHF/ non-TCS food
0.88 - 0.90 non-PHF/ non-TCS food non-PHF/ non-TCS food non-PHF/ non-TCS food PA***
>0.90 - 0.92 non-PHF/ non-TCS food non-PHF/ non-TCS food PA PA
>0.92 non-PHF/ non-TCS food PA PA PA
* PHF means Potentially Hazardous Food
** TCS food means Time/Temperature Control for Safety Food
*** PA means Product Assessment required
formation; and
(b) Except as specified in Subparagraph (3)(d) of this definition, a food that because of the interaction of its A
W
and pH values is designated as Product Assessment Required (PA) in Table A or B of this definition:
(3) "Potentially hazardous food (time/temperature control for safety food)" does not include:
(a) An air-cooled hard-boiled egg with shell intact, or an egg with shell intact that is not hard-boiled, but has
11
been pasteurized to destroy all viable salmonellae;
(b) A food in an unopened hermetically sealed container that is commercially processed to achieve and
maintain commercial sterility under conditions of non-refrigerated storage and distribution;
(c) A food that because of its pH or A value, or interaction of A and pH values, is designated as a non-
W W
PHF/non-TCS food in Table A or B of this definition;
(d) A food that is designated as Product Assessment Required (PA) in Table A or B of this definition and has
undergone a Product Assessment showing that the growth or toxin formation of pathogenic microorganisms
that are reasonably likely to occur in that food is precluded due to:
(i) Intrinsic factors including added or natural characteristics of the food such as preservatives,
antimicrobials, humectants, acidulants, or nutrients,
(ii) Extrinsic factors including environmental or operational factors that affect the food such as packaging,
modified atmosphere such as reduced oxygen packaging, shelf life and use, or temperature range of
storage and use, or
(iii) A combination of intrinsic and extrinsic factors; or
(e) A food that does not support the growth or toxin formation of pathogenic microorganisms in accordance with
one of the Subparagraphs (3)(a) - (3)(d) of this definition even though the food may contain a pathogenic
microorganism or chemical or physical contaminant at a level sufficient to cause illness or injury.
"Poultry" means:
(1) Any domesticated bird (chickens, turkeys, ducks, geese, guineas, ratites or squabs), whether live or dead, as
defined in 9 CFR 381.1 Poultry Products Inspection Regulations Definitions, Poultry; and
(2) Any migratory waterfowl or game bird, pheasant, partridge, quail, grouse, or pigeon, whether live or dead, as
defined in 9 CFR 362.1 Voluntary Poultry Inspection Regulations, Definitions.
"Premises" means:
(1) The physical facility, its contents, and the contiguous land or property under the control of the permit holder; or
(2) The physical facility, its contents, and the land or property not described under Subparagraph (1) of this
definition if its facilities and contents are under the control of the permit holder and may impact food establishment
personnel, facilities, or operations, and a food establishment is only one component of a larger operation such as a
health care facility, hotel, motel, school, recreational camp, or prison.
“Preparation” means the process whereby food is transformed into a consumable form. This includes, but is not
limited to, slicing or dicing vegetables, grating cheese, portioning foods, slicing sandwiches, blending foods, or cooking
or reheating foods.
"Primal cut" means a basic major cut into which carcasses and sides of meat are separated, such as a beef round, pork
loin, lamb flank, or veal breast.
“Priority item” means a provision in this code whose application contributes directly to the elimination, prevention or
reduction to an acceptable level, hazards associated with foodborne illness or injury and there is no other provision that
more directly controls the hazard.
(1) “Priority item” includes items with a quantifiable measure to show control of hazards such as cooking,
reheating, cooling, and handwashing.
(2) “Priority item” is an item that is denoted in this code with a superscript P-P; and
(3) “Priority item” is an item that carries a weight of five points on the Food Service Inspection Report or
Inspectional Guide and is considered a critical violation as referenced in ORS chapter 624.
“Priority foundation item” means a provision in this code whose application supports, facilitates or enables one or
more priority items.
(1) “Priority foundation item” includes an item that requires the purposeful incorporation of specific actions,
equipment or procedures by industry management to attain control of risk factors that contribute to foodborne illness
or injury such as personnel training, infrastructure or necessary equipment, HACCP plans, documentation or record
keeping, and labeling.
(2) “Priority foundation item” is an item that is denoted in this code with a superscript Pf-Pf; and
(3) “Priority foundation item” is an item that carries a weight of three points on the Food Service Inspection
Report or Inspectional Guide and is considered a critical violation as referenced in ORS chapter 624.
12
(4) “Priority foundation item” includes items that relate to the design and operation of a mobile food unit that are
fundamental to maintaining them as a vehicle as defined in ORS chapter 624, such as mobility and integral
operations.
"Public water system" has the meaning stated in 40 CFR 141 National Primary Drinking Water Regulations.
"Quarterly Sampling" means a sample is taken and submitted according to the following schedule: 1st Quarter is
January 1 through March 31, 2nd Quarter is April 1 through June 30, 3rd Quarter is July 1 through September 30 and the
4th Quarter is October 1 through December 31.
"Ratite" means a flightless bird such as an emu, ostrich, or rhea.
“Raw-to-Finish” means cooking foods that are potentially hazardous when in a raw state to a finished, edible state.
This practice includes, but is not limited to, cooking raw hamburgers or barbecuing raw meats.
Ready-to-Eat Food.
(1) "Ready-to-eat food" means food that:
(a) Is in a form that is edible without additional preparation to achieve food safety, as specified under one of the
following: ¶ 3-401.11(A) or (B), § 3-401.12, or § 3-402.11, or as specified in ¶ 3-401.11(C); or
(b) Is a raw or partially cooked animal food and the consumer is advised as specified in Subparagraphs 3-
401.11(D)(1) and (3); or
(c) Is prepared in accordance with a variance that is granted as specified in Subparagraph 3-401.11(D) (4); and
(d) May receive additional preparation for palatability or aesthetic, epicurean, gastronomic, or culinary
purposes.
(2) "Ready-to-eat food" includes:
(a) Raw animal food that is cooked as specified under § 3-401.11 or 3401.12, or frozen as specified under § 3-
402.11;
(b) Raw fruits and vegetables that are washed as specified under § 3-302.15;
(c) Fruits and vegetables that are cooked for hot holding, as specified under § 3-401.13;
(d) All potentially hazardous food (time/temperature control for safety food) that is cooked to the temperature
and time required for the specific food under Subpart 3-401 and cooled as specified under § 3-501.14;
(e) Plant food for which further washing, cooking, or other processing is not required for food safety, and from
which rinds, peels, husks, or shells, if naturally present are removed;
(f) Substances derived from plants such as spices, seasonings, and sugar;
(g) A bakery item such as bread, cakes, pies, fillings, or icing for which further cooking is not required for food
safety;
(h) The following products that are produced in accordance with USDA guidelines and that have received a
lethality treatment for pathogens: dry, fermented sausages, such as dry salami or pepperoni; salt-cured meat and
poultry products, such as prosciutto ham, country cured ham, and Parma ham; and dried meat and poultry
products, such as jerky or beef sticks; and
(i) Foods manufactured as specified in 21 CFR Part 113, Thermally Processed Low-Acid Foods Packaged in
Hermetically Sealed Containers.
“Recheck Inspection” means
(1) An inspection to determine whether specified corrections have been made or alternative procedures maintained
for violations identified in previous inspections; or
(2) An inspection to determine whether specific corrections have been maintained for priority and priority
foundation violations creating a significantly increased risk for foodborne illness. Recheck inspections may also be
referred to as reinspections or follow-up inspections.
Reduced Oxygen Packaging.
(1) "Reduced oxygen packaging" means:
(a) The reduction of the amount of oxygen in a package by removing oxygen; displacing oxygen and replacing
it with another gas or combination of gases; or otherwise controlling the oxygen content to a level below that
normally found in the atmosphere (approximately 21% at sea level); and
(b) A process as specified in Subparagraph (1)(a) of this definition that involves a food for which the hazards
Clostridium botulinum or Listeria monocytogenes require control in the final packaged form.
13
(2) "Reduced oxygen packaging" includes:
(a) Vacuum packaging, in which air is removed from a package of food and the package is hermetically sealed
so that a vacuum remains inside the package;
(b) Modified atmosphere packaging, in which the atmosphere of a package of food is modified so that its
composition is different from air but the atmosphere may change over time due to the permeability of the
packaging material or the respiration of the food. Modified atmosphere packaging includes reduction in the
proportion of oxygen, total replacement of oxygen, or an increase in the proportion of other gases such as
carbon dioxide or nitrogen;
(c) Controlled atmosphere packaging, in which the atmosphere of a package of food is modified so that until the
package is opened, its composition is different from air, and continuous control of that atmosphere is
maintained, such as by using oxygen scavengers or a combination of total replacement of oxygen, nonrespiring
FOOD, and impermeable packaging material;
(d) Cook chill packaging, in which cooked food is hot filled into impermeable bags which have the air expelled
and are then sealed or crimped closed. The bagged food is rapidly chilled and refrigerated at temperatures that
inhibit the growth of psychrotrophic pathogens; or
(e) Sous vide packaging, in which raw or partially cooked food is placed in a hermetically sealed, impermeable
bag, cooked in the bag, rapidly chilled, and refrigerated at temperatures that inhibit the growth of
psychrotrophic pathogens.
"Refuse" means solid waste not carried by water through the sewage system.
"Regulatory authority" means the local, state, or federal enforcement body or authorized representative having
jurisdiction over the food establishment.
"Reminder" means a written statement concerning the health risk of consuming animal foods raw, undercooked, or
without otherwise being processed to eliminate pathogens.
“Repeat violation” means a violation of a rule that is the same specific problem or process as indicated on the Food
Service Inspection Report occurring in two consecutive semi-annual inspections.
"Re-service" means the transfer of food that is unused and returned by a consumer after being served or sold and in the
possession of the consumer, to another person
"Restrict" means to limit the activities of a food employee so that there is no risk of transmitting a disease that is
transmissible through food and the food employee does not work with exposed food, clean equipment, utensils, linens or
unwrapped single-service or single-use articles.
"Restricted egg" means any check, dirty egg, incubator reject, inedible, leaker, or loss as defined in 9 CFR 590.
"Restricted use pesticide" means a pesticide product that contains the active ingredients specified in 40 CFR 152.175
Pesticides classified for restricted use, and that is limited to use by or under the direct supervision of a certified
applicator.
"Risk" means the likelihood that an adverse health effect will occur within a population as a result of a hazard in a food.
"Safe material" means:
(1) An article manufactured from or composed of materials that may not reasonably be expected to result, directly or
indirectly, in their becoming a component or otherwise affecting the characteristics of any food;
(2) An additive that is used as specified in § 409 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act; or
(3) Other materials that are not additives and that are used in conformity with applicable regulations of the Food and
Drug Administration.
“Sample” means a three ounce or less portion of a food or beverage.
"Sanitization" means the application of cumulative heat or chemicals on cleaned food-contact surfaces that, when
evaluated for efficacy, is sufficient to yield a reduction of 5 logs, which is equal to a 99.999% reduction, of
representative disease microorganisms of public health importance.
14
"Sealed" means free of cracks or other openings that allow the entry or passage of moisture.
“Semi-annual inspection” means an unannounced complete inspection conducted twice during the calendar year; one in
each half of the year, but not less than 90 days or more than 270 days apart.
"Service animal" means an animal such as a guide dog, signal dog, or other animal individually trained to provide
assistance to an individual with a disability.
"Servicing area" means an operating base location to which a mobile food establishment or transportation vehicle
returns regularly for such things as vehicle and equipment cleaning, discharging liquid or solid wastes, refilling water
tanks and ice bins, and boarding food.
"Sewage" means liquid waste containing animal or vegetable matter in suspension or solution and may include liquids
containing chemicals in solution.
"Shellfish control authority" means a state, federal, foreign, tribal, or other government entity legally responsible for
administering a program that includes certification of molluscan shellfish harvesters and dealers for interstate commerce.
"Shellstock" means raw, in-shell molluscan shellfish.
"Shiga toxin-producing Escherichia coli" (STEC) means any E. coli capable of producing Shiga toxins (also called
verocytotoxins or "Shiga-like" toxins). Examples of serotypes of STEC include both O157 and non-O157 E. coli. Also
see enterohemorrhagic Escherichia coli.
"Shucked shellfish" means molluscan shellfish that have one or both shells removed.
"Single-service articles" means tableware, carry-out utensils, and other items such as bags, containers, placemats,
stirrers, straws, toothpicks, and wrappers that are designed and constructed for one time, one person use after which
they are intended for discard.
Single-Use Articles.
(1) "Single-use articles" means utensils and bulk food containers designed and constructed to be used once and
discarded.
(2) "Single-use articles" includes items such as wax paper, butcher paper, plastic wrap, formed aluminum food
containers, jars, plastic tubs or buckets, bread wrappers, pickle barrels, ketchup bottles, and number 10 cans which
do not meet the materials, durability, strength, and cleanability specifications under §§ 4-101.11, 4-201.11, and 4-
202.11 for multiuse utensils.
Single-use plastic straw.
(1) “Single-use plastic straw” means a tube make primarily from plastic that is derived from petroleum or a
biologically based polymer, such as corn or another plant source, and that is intended:
(a) To transfer liquid from a container to a consumer’s mouth;
(b) For a single use; and
(c) For disposal after the single use.
(2) A “single-use plastic straw” does not include:
(a) A straw made from materials other than plastic, including but not limited to paper, pasta, sugar cane, wood
or bamboo; and
(b) A plastic straw that is attached to or packaged with a beverage container before the beverage container is
offered for sale.
"Slacking" means the process of moderating the temperature of a food such as allowing a food to gradually increase
from a temperature of -23oC (-10oF) to -4o C (25oF) in preparation for deep-fat frying or to facilitate even heat
penetration during the cooking of previously block-frozen food such as shrimp.
"Smooth" means:
(1) A food-contact surface having a surface free of pits and inclusions with a cleanability equal to or exceeding that
of (100 grit) number 3 stainless steel;
15
(2) A nonfood-contact surface of equipment having a surface equal to that of commercial grade hot-rolled steel free
of visible scale; and
(3) A floor, wall, or ceiling having an even or level surface with no roughness or projections that render it difficult
to clean.
"Tableware" means eating, drinking, and serving utensils for table use such as flatware including forks, knives, and
spoons; hollowware including bowls, cups, serving dishes, and tumblers; and plates.
"Temperature measuring device" means a thermometer, thermocouple, thermistor, or other device that indicates the
temperature of food, air, or water.
"Temporary food establishment" means the same as ORS 624.010(4), (10) and (11).
“Transport Vehicle” means a vehicle used to transport foods or utensils from the base of operation to a mobile food
unit.
"USDA" means the U.S. Department of Agriculture.
"Utensil" means a food-contact implement or container used in the storage, preparation, transportation, dispensing, sale,
or service of food, such as kitchenware or tableware that is multiuse, single-service, or single-use; gloves used in contact
with food; temperature sensing probes of food temperature measuring devices; trays used with highchairs; and probe-
type price or identification tags used in contact with food.
"Variance" means a written document issued by the regulatory authority that authorizes a modification or waiver
of one or more requirements of this Code if, in the opinion of the regulatory authority, a health hazard or nuisance
will not result from the modification or waiver.
“Vehicle” means any device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a
public highway, and includes vehicles that are propelled or powered by any means. This definition includes
watercraft.
"Vending machine" means a self-service device that, upon insertion of a coin, paper currency, token, card, or key, or
by optional manual operation, dispenses unit servings of food in bulk or in packages without the necessity of
replenishing the device between each vending operation.
"Vending machine location" means the room, enclosure, space, or area where one or more vending machines are
installed and operated and includes the storage areas and areas on the premises that are used to service and maintain the
vending machines.
“Violation” means any condition that fails to meet a requirement of ORS chapter 624 or this rule.
“Violations creating an imminent danger to public health” means those priority item violations in which at least one
of the following conditions exits:
(1) Food and drink is spoiled, unwholesome, or contaminated with pathogenic or fecal organisms, toxic chemicals,
insect or rodent parts or excreta, or other harmful substances or articles;
(2) Potentially hazardous foods have been kept at temperatures above 41 degrees Fahrenheit and below 135 degrees
Fahrenheit for four hours or more;
(3) A food employee has a reportable disease or medical condition under subpart 2-201 of the 2009 FDA Food
Code.
“Violations creating a potential danger to public health” means all priority and priority foundation item violations
other than those that create an imminent danger to public health.
“Violations creating a significantly increased risk for foodborne illness” include:
(1) Potentially hazardous foods at improper temperatures;
(2) Cross contamination of raw to ready-to-eat foods; and
(3) Poor personal hygiene and handwashing.
16
“Warehouse” means any place where food, utensils, single-service articles, cleaning or servicing supplies for vending
machines, mobile units, or commissaries are stored.
"Warewashing" means the cleaning and sanitizing of utensils and food-contact surfaces of equipment.
"Whole-muscle, intact beef" means whole muscle beef that is not injected, mechanically tenderized, reconstructed,
or scored and marinated, from which beefsteaks may be cut.
“Wild fresh mushroom” means a mushroom that has not been processed, dried or cultivated.
17
Chapter 2
Management and Personnel
Parts
2-1 SUPERVISION
2-2 EMPLOYEE HEALTH
2-3 PERSONAL CLEANLINESS
2-4 HYGIENIC PRACTICES
2-1 SUPERVISION
Subparts: 2-101 Responsibility
2-102 Knowledge
2-103 Duties
2-101.11 Assignment.
(A) Except as specified in ¶ (B) of this section, the permit holder shall be the person in charge or shall designate a person in
charge and shall ensure that a person in charge is present at the food establishment during all hours of operation.Pf
(B) In a food establishment with two or more separately permitted departments that are the legal responsibility of the same
permit holder and that are located on the same premises, the permit holder may, during specific time periods when food is
not being prepared, packaged, or served, designate a single person in charge who is present on the premises during all hours
of operation, and who is responsible for each separately permitted food establishment on the premises.Pf
2-102.11 Demonstration.
Based on the risks inherent to the food operation, during inspections and upon request the person in charge shall demonstrate
to the regulatory authority knowledge of foodborne disease prevention, application of the Hazard Analysis and Critical
Control Point principles, and the requirements of this Code. The person in charge shall demonstrate this knowledge by:
(A) Complying with this Code by having no violations of priority items during the current inspection;Pf
(B) Being a certified food protection manager who has shown proficiency of required information through passing a test that
is part of an accredited program or a training program approved by the Oregon Health Authority or Oregon Department of
Agriculture;Pf or
(C) Responding correctly to the inspector's questions as they relate to the specific food operation. The areas of knowledge
include:
(1) Describing the relationship between the prevention of foodborne disease and the personal hygiene of a food
employee; Pf
(2) Explaining the responsibility of the person in charge for preventing the transmission of foodborne disease by a food
employee who has a disease or medical condition that may cause foodborne disease; Pf
(3) Describing the symptoms associated with the diseases that are transmissible through food; Pf
(4) Explaining the significance of the relationship between maintaining the time and temperature of potentially
hazardous food (time/temperature for safety food) and the prevention of foodborne illness; Pf
(5) Explaining the hazards involved in the consumption of raw or undercooked meat, poultry, eggs and fish; Pf
(6) Stating the required food temperatures and times for safe cooking of potentially hazardous food (time/temperature for
safety food) including meat, poultry, eggs and fish; Pf
(7) Stating the required temperatures and times for the safe refrigerated storage, hot holding, cooling, and reheating of
potentially hazardous food (time/temperature for safety food); Pf
(8) Describing the relationship between the prevention of foodborne illness and the management and control of the
following:
(a) Cross contamination, Pf
(b) Deleted
(c) Handwashing, Pf and
(d) Maintaining the food establishment in a clean condition and in good repair; Pf
(9) Describing foods identified as major food allergens and the symptoms that a major food allergen could cause in a
sensitive individual who has an allergic reaction. Pf
18
(10) Explaining the relationship between food safety and providing equipment that is:
(a) Sufficient in number and capacity, Pf and
(b) Properly designed, constructed, located, installed, operated, maintained, and cleaned; Pf
(11) Explaining correct procedures for cleaning and sanitizing utensils and food-contact surfaces of equipment; Pf
(12) Identifying the source of water used and measures taken to ensure that it remains protected from contamination such
as providing protection from backflow and precluding the creation of cross connections; Pf
(13) Identifying poisonous or toxic materials in the food establishment and the procedures necessary to ensure that they
are safely stored, dispensed, used, and disposed of according to law; Pf
(14) Identifying critical control points in the operation from purchasing through sale or service that when not controlled
may contribute to the transmission of foodborne illness and explaining steps taken to ensure that the points are controlled
in accordance with the requirements of this Code; Pf
(15) Explaining the details of how the person in charge and food employees comply with the HACCP plan if a plan is
required by the law, this Code, or an agreement between the regulatory authority and the food establishment; Pf
(16) Explaining the responsibilities, rights, and authorities assigned by this Code to the:
(a) Food employee, Pf
(b) Conditional employee, Pf
(c) Person in charge, Pf
(d) Regulatory authority; Pf and
(17) Explaining how the person in charge, food employees, and conditional employees comply with reporting
responsibilities and exclusion or restriction of food employees. Pf
2-103.11 Person in Charge.
The person in charge shall ensure that:
(A) Food establishment operations are not conducted in a private home or in a room used as living or sleeping quarters as
specified under § 6-202.111; Pf
(B) Persons unnecessary to the food establishment operation are not allowed in the food preparation, food storage, or
warewashing areas, except that brief visits and tours may be authorized by the person in charge if steps are taken to ensure
that exposed food; clean equipment, utensils, and linens; and unwrapped single-service and single-use articles are protected
from contamination; Pf
(C) Employees and other persons such as delivery and maintenance persons and pesticide applicators entering the food
preparation, food storage, and warewashing areas comply with this Code; Pf
(D) Employees are effectively cleaning their hands, by routinely monitoring the employees' handwashing; Pf
(E) Employees are visibly observing foods as they are received to determine that they are from approved sources, delivered at
the required temperatures, protected from contamination, unadulterated, and accurately presented, by routinely monitoring
the employees' observations and periodically evaluating foods upon their receipt; Pf
(F) Employees are properly cooking potentially hazardous food (time/temperature control for safety food), being particularly
careful in cooking those foods known to cause severe foodborne illness and death, such as eggs and comminuted meats,
through daily oversight of the employees' routine monitoring of the cooking temperatures using appropriate temperature
measuring devices properly scaled and calibrated as specified under § 4-203.11 and ¶ 4-502.11(B); Pf
(G) Employees are using proper methods to rapidly cool potentially hazardous foods (time/temperature control for safety
foods) that are not held hot or are not for consumption within 4 hours, through daily oversight of the employees' routine
monitoring of food temperatures during cooling; Pf
(H) Consumers who order raw; or partially cooked ready-to-eat foods of animal origin are informed as specified under § 3-
603.11 that the food is not cooked sufficiently to ensure its safety; Pf
(I) Employees are properly sanitizing cleaned multiuse equipment and utensils before they are reused, through routine
monitoring of solution temperature and exposure time for hot water sanitizing, and chemical concentration, pH, temperature,
and exposure time for chemical sanitizing; Pf
(J) Consumers are notified that clean tableware is to be used when they return to self-service areas such as salad bars and
buffets as specified under § 3-304.16; Pf
(K) Deleted.
(L) Employees are properly trained in food safety, including food allergy awareness, as it relates to their assigned duties; Pf
and
(M) Food employees and conditional employees are informed of their responsibility to report in accordance with law, to the
person in charge, information about their health and activities as they relate to diseases that are transmissible through food, as
specified under ¶ 2-201.11(A). Pf
19
2-2 EMPLOYEE HEALTH
Subpart: 2-201 Disease or Medical Condition
2-201.11 Responsibility of Person in Charge.
(A) The permit holder shall require food employees to report to the person in charge information about their health and
activities as they relate to diseases that are transmissible through food. A food employee or conditional employee shall report
the date of onset of symptoms, diagnosis of an illness, or of a diagnosis without symptoms that are listed under 2-201.12.P
(B) The person in charge shall notify the regulatory authority that a food employee is:
(1) Jaundice;Pf or
(2) Diagnosed with an illness listed in 2-201.12.Pf
(C) A food employee shall:
(1) Report to the person in charge if they have been diagnosed with an illness or are experiencing symptoms specified
under 2-201.12;P
(2) Report to the person in charge if they have been living in the same household or working in a setting where there is a
confirmed disease outbreak with an illness specified under 2-201.12;P and
(3) Comply with exclusions and restrictions specified under section 2-201.12.P
2-201.12 Exclusions and Restrictions.
The person in charge shall exclude or restrict a food employee from a food establishment in accordance with the following:
(A) Except when the symptom is from a noninfectious condition, exclude a food employee that has any of the following signs
or symptoms caused by illness, infection, or other source that is associated with an acute illness:
(1) Vomiting;P
(2) Diarrhea;P
(3) Sore throat with fever;P or
(4) Jaundice.P
(B) Exclude or restrict a food employee that has a lesion containing pus such as a boil or infected wound that is open or
draining and is:
(1) On the hands or wrists, unless an impermeable cover such as a finger cot protects the lesion and a single use glove is
worn over the impermeable cover;P
(2) On exposed portions of the arms, unless the lesion is protected by an impermeable cover;P or
(3) On other parts of the body, unless the lesion is covered by a dry, durable, tight-fitting bandage.P
(C) Exclude a food employee from a food establishment if the food employee is diagnosed by a health practitioner or
presumptive with:
(1) Norovirus;P
(2) Hepatitis A virus;P
(3) Shigella spp.;P
(4) Enterohemorrhagic or Shiga Toxin-Producing Escherichia coli;P or
(5) Salmonella Typhi.P
2-201.13 Removal of Exclusions and Restrictions.
The person in charge shall adhere to the following conditions when removing, adjusting, or retaining the exclusion or
restriction of a food employee:
(A) Restrictions or exclusions on persons diagnosed or presumptive with Hepatitis A, shigellosis or Shiga-toxigenic
Escherichia coli (STEC) or Salmonella typhi infection shall not be lifted until a licensed laboratory has determined that the
employee is free of pathogens in accordance with OAR 333-019-0014(4) and 333-019-0046. Such restrictions may be waived
or modified at the discretion of the local public health authority.P
(B) Except as specified in (A) of section 2-201.13, the person in charge may remove a restriction or exclusion specified under
2-201.12 if the restricted person:
(1) Is free of the symptoms specified under 2-201.12(A)(1)-(3) for 24 hours;P or
(2) Provides to the person in charge written medical documentation from a health practitioner that states the symptom is
from a noninfectious condition;P or
(3) The person in charge obtains approval from the local public health authority.P
(C) Reinstate a food employee who was diagnosed or presumptive with an infection from Norovirus if the person in charge
obtains approval from the local public health authority and one of the following conditions is met:
(1) The food employee provides to the person in charge written medical documentation from a health practitioner stating
the food employee is free of a Norovirus infection;P or
20
(2) The food employee’s symptoms of vomiting or diarrhea have resolved and more than 48 hours have passed since the
food employee became asymptomatic;P or
(3) The food employee did not develop symptoms and more than 48 hours have passed since the food employee was
diagnosed.P
2-3 PERSONAL CLEANLINESS
Subparts: 2-301 Hands and Arms
2-302 Fingernails
2-303 Jewelry
2-304 Outer Clothing
2-301.11 Clean Condition.
Food employees shall keep their hands and exposed portions of their arms clean.P
2-301.12 Cleaning Procedure.
(A) Except as specified in ¶ (D) of this section, food employees shall clean their hands and exposed portions of their arms,
including surrogate prosthetic devices for hands or arms for at least 20 seconds, using a cleaning compound in a handwashing
sink that is equipped as specified under § 5-202.12 and Subpart 6-301. P
(B) Food employees shall use the following cleaning procedure in the order stated to clean their hands and exposed portions
of their arms, including surrogate prosthetic devices for hands and arms:
(1) Rinse under clean, running warm water; P
(2) Apply an amount of cleaning compound recommended by the cleaning compound manufacturer; P
(3) Rub together vigorously for at least 10 to 15 seconds while:
(a) Paying particular attention to removing soil from underneath the fingernails during the cleaning procedure, P and
(b) Creating friction on the surfaces of the hands and arms or surrogate prosthetic devices for hands and arms, finger
tips, and areas between the fingers; P
(4) Thoroughly rinse under clean, running warm water; P and
(5) Immediately follow the cleaning procedure with thorough drying using a method as specified under § 6-301.12. P
(C) To avoid recontaminating their hands or surrogate prosthetic devices, food employees may use disposable paper towels
or similar clean barriers when touching surfaces such as manually operated faucet handles on a handwashing sink or the
handle of a restroom door.
(D) If approved and capable of removing the types of soils encountered in the food operations involved, an automatic
handwashing facility may be used by food employees to clean their hands or surrogate prosthetic devices.
2-301.13 Double Handwashing.
(A) After defecating, contacting body fluids and discharges, or handling waste containing fecal matter, body fluids, or body
discharges, and before beginning or returning to work, food employees shall wash their hands twice using the cleaning
procedure specified in § 2-301.12.P
(B) Except when one handwashing sink is allowed under § 5-203.11(A), after using the toilet facility food employees shall
wash their hands twice, first at a handwashing sink in the toilet facility and again at a handwashing sink in the food
preparation area.P
2-301.14 When to Wash.
Food employees shall clean their hands and exposed portions of their arms as specified under § 2-301.12 immediately before
engaging in food preparation including working with exposed food, clean equipment and utensils, and unwrapped single-
service and single-use articles,P and:
(A) After touching bare human body parts other than clean hands and clean, exposed portions of arms;P
(B) After using the toilet room;P
(C) After caring for or handling service animals or aquatic animals as specified in ¶ 2-403.11(B);P
(D) Except as specified in ¶ 2-401.11(B), after coughing, sneezing, using a handkerchief or disposable tissue, using tobacco,
eating, or drinking;P
(E) After handling soiled equipment or utensils;P
(F) During food preparation, as often as necessary to remove soil and contamination and to prevent cross contamination when
changing tasks;P
(G) When switching between working with raw food and working with ready-to-eat food;P and
(H) Before donning gloves for working with food unless a glove change is not the result of glove contamination.P
(I) After engaging in other activities that contaminate the hands.P
21
2-301.15 Where to Wash.
Food employees shall clean their hands in a handwashing sink or approved automatic handwashing facility and may not clean
their hands in a sink used for food preparation, or in a service sink or a curbed cleaning facility used for the disposal of mop
water and similar liquid waste.Pf
2-301.16 Hand Antiseptics.
(A) A hand antiseptic and a chemical hand antiseptic solution used as a hand dip shall be used according to labeled
directions, be approved for use with food, and be applied to hands that are cleaned as specified under section 2-301.12.Pf
(B) A chemical hand antiseptic solution used as a hand dip shall be maintained clean and at a strength equivalent to at least
100 mg/L chlorine.Pf
2-302.11 Maintenance.
(A) Food employees shall keep their fingernails trimmed, filed, and maintained so the edges and surfaces are cleanable and
not rough.Pf
(B) Unless wearing intact gloves in good repair, a food employee may not wear fingernail polish or artificial fingernails when
working with exposed food.Pf
2-303.11 Prohibition.
Except for a plain ring such as a wedding band, while preparing food, food employees may not wear jewelry including
medical information jewelry on their arms and hands.
2-304.11 Clean Condition.
Food employees shall wear clean outer clothing to prevent contamination of food, equipment, utensils, linens, and single-
service and single-use articles.
2-4 HYGIENIC PRACTICES
Subparts: 2-401 Food Contamination Prevention
2-402 Hair Restraints
2-403 Animals
2-401.11 Eating, Drinking, or Using Tobacco.
(A) Except as specified in ¶ (B) of this section, an employee shall eat, drink, or use any form of tobacco only in designated
areas where the contamination of exposed food; clean equipment, utensils, and linens; unwrapped single-service and single-
use articles; or other items needing protection can not result.Pf
(B) A food employee may drink from a closed beverage container if the container is handled to prevent contamination of:
(1) The employee's hands;
(2) The container; and
(3) Exposed food; clean equipment, utensils, and linens; and unwrapped single-service and single-use articles.
2-401.12 Discharges from the Eyes, Nose, and Mouth.
Food employees experiencing persistent sneezing, coughing, or a runny nose that causes discharges from the eyes, nose, or
mouth may not work with exposed food; clean equipment, utensils, and linens; or unwrapped single-service or single-use
articles.Pf
2-402.11 Effectiveness.
(A) Employees shall use effective hair restraints to prevent the contamination of food or food-contact surfaces.
(B) This section does not apply to food employees such as counter staff who only serve beverages and wrapped or packaged
foods, hostesses, and wait staff if they present a minimal risk of contaminating exposed food; clean equipment, utensils, and
linens; and unwrapped single-service and single-use articles.
2-403.11 Handling Prohibition.
(A) Except as specified in ¶ (B) of this section, food employees may not care for or handle animals that may be present such
as patrol dogs, service animals, or pets that are allowed as specified in Subparagraphs 6-501.115(B)(2)-(5) and (E).Pf
(B) Food employees with service animals may handle or care for their service animals and food employees may handle or
care for fish in aquariums or molluscan shellfish or crustacea in display tanks if they wash their hands as specified under §
2-301.12 and ¶ 2-301.14(C).
22
Chapter 3
Food
Parts
3-1 CHARACTERISTICS
3-2 SOURCES, SPECIFICATIONS, AND ORIGINAL CONTAINERS AND RECORDS
3-3 PROTECTION FROM CONTAMINATION AFTER RECEIVING
3-4 DESTRUCTION OF ORGANISMS OF PUBLIC HEALTH CONCERN
3-5 LIMITATION OF GROWTH OF ORGANISMS OF PUBLIC HEALTH CONCERN
3-6 FOOD IDENTITY, PRESENTATION, AND ON-PREMISES LABELING
3-7 CONTAMINATED FOOD
3-8 SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS FOR HIGHLY SUSCEPTIBLE POPULATIONS
3-1 CHARACTERISTICS
Subpart 3-101 Condition
3-101.11 Safe, Unadulterated, and Honestly Presented.
Food shall be safe, unadulterated, and, as specified under § 3-601.12, honestly presented.P
3-2 SOURCES, SPECIFICATIONS, AND ORIGINAL CONTAINERS AND RECORDS
Subparts 3-201 Sources
3-202 Specifications for Receiving
3-203 Original Containers and Records
3-201.11 Compliance with Food Law.
(A) Food shall be obtained from sources that comply with law.P
(B) Except as specified in paragraphs (J), (K) and (L) of this section, food prepared in a private home may not be used or
offered for human consumption in a food establishment.P
(C) Packaged food shall be labeled as specified in law, including 21 CFR 101 Food Labeling, 9 CFR 317 Labeling, Marking
Devices, and Containers, and 9 CFR 381 Subpart N Labeling and Containers, and as specified under §§ 3-202.17 and 3-
202.18. Pf
(D) Fish, other than those specified in paragraph 3-402.11(B), that are intended for consumption in raw or undercooked
form and allowed as specified in Subparagraph 3-401.11(D), may be offered for sale or service if they are obtained from a
supplier that freezes the fish as specified under § 3-402.11; or if they are frozen on the premises as specified under § 3-
402.11 and records are retained as specified under § 3-402.12.
(E) Whole-muscle, intact beef steaks that are intended for consumption in an undercooked form without a consumer advisory
as specified in ¶ 3-401.11(C) shall be:
(1) Obtained from a food processing plant that, upon request by the purchaser, packages the steaks and labels them, to
indicate that the steaks meet the definition of whole-muscle, intact beef, Pf or
(2) Deemed acceptable by the regulatory authority based on other evidence, such as written buyer specifications or
invoices, that indicates that the steaks meet the definition of whole-muscle, intact beef, Pf and
(3) If individually cut in a food establishment:
(a) Cut from whole-muscle intact beef that is labeled by a food processing plant as specified in Subparagraph (E)(1)
of this section or identified as specified in Subparagraph (E)(2) of this section, Pf
(b) Prepared so they remain intact, Pf and
(c) If packaged for undercooking in a food establishment, labeled as specified in Subparagraph (E)(1) of this section
or identified as specified in (E)(2) of this section. Pf
(F) Meat and poultry that is not a ready-to-eat food and is in a packaged form when it is offered for sale or otherwise offered
for consumption, shall be labeled to include safe handling instructions as specified in law, including 9 CFR 317.2(l) and 9
CFR 381.125(b).
(G) Eggs that have not been specifically treated to destroy all viable Salmonellae shall be labeled to include safe handling
instructions as specified in law, including 21 CFR 101.17(h).
23
(H) Game meat which has been donated to a charitable organization and has been inspected and processed as provided in
ORS 619.095 may be served for human consumption by that charitable organization. P
(I) Except as required in ¶¶ 3-201.11(A) through (H) of the 2009 FDA Food Code and in accordance with ORS 624.116 any
person, business or volunteer group may donate food to a benevolent organization that meets the requirements in ORS
624.101. The Internal Revenue Service (IRS) may issue a “letter of determination” that should be used as the basis for
assessing compliance with benevolent status of ORS 624.101. The person, business or volunteer group making the donation
shall inspect the food to ensure its fitness for human consumption and discard all food that is unwholesome. The following
donated food items are approved for use by benevolent organizations:
(1) Commercially prepared foods, canned goods, and milk products, marine and freshwater fishery products or meat
animals; i.e., cattle, sheep, goats, equine, swine, poultry or rabbits obtained from facilities licensed by the Oregon
Department of Agriculture or the Department of Human Services according to ORS 603.616, and ORS Chapters 621,
622, 624, 625 and 635;P
(2) Home baked bread, rolls, pies, cakes, doughnuts or pastries not having perishable fillings, icings, toppings or glazes;
(3) Fresh fruit and produce from private gardens or commercial growers;P
(4) Salvageable food which has lost the label or which has been subjected to possible damage due to accident, fire, flood,
adverse weather or similar cause. Reconditioning of salvageable food shall be conducted according to the 1984 Model
Food Salvage Code recommended by the Association of Food and Drug Officials and U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services;P
(5) Other food as may be approved by the Oregon Health Authority upon prior notification by the donator or benevolent
organization;
(6) Unless alternative language has been approved by the regulatory authority, a notice shall be posted in public view
that says: “NOTICE: Food served at this location may not have been inspected by the regulatory authority.”Pf
(J) Food prepared in a private home that is licensed as a home processor by the Oregon Department of Agriculture.P
(K) A Benevolent Meal Site may serve food prepared by volunteers in an unlicensed kitchen under the following conditions:
(1) (a) Volunteers must obtain a food handler certificate as required in OAR 333-175. If the food is prepared by a group
of people at the same location, only the person supervising the food preparation shall be required to obtain a
certificate. The person supervising the food preparation shall be at the preparation site at all times;
(b) Volunteers that provide only non-potentially hazardous baked goods as allowed under paragraph (I) of this
section or whole, uncut fresh fruits and vegetables are exempt from the food handler certification requirement.
(2) (a)The organization sponsoring the Benevolent Meal Site must obtain a signed statement from the volunteers that
they have reviewed and will follow the requirements of this section. The signed statement must include the
volunteer’s name, contact information and the kinds of food donated;
(b) The signed statement shall be maintained at the Benevolent Meal Site and be available for review.
(3) Food Preparation and Service:
(a) The following foods may not be provided: home-canned or home processed foods, wild mushrooms, wild game,
shellfish, sport-caught fish, raw milk, raw animal foods, eggs from non-commercial sources, unpasteurized juices,
and water and ice from unapproved water systems;P
(b) Except whole, uncut fresh fruit and vegetables and non-potentially hazardous baked goods, leftover food
prepared by volunteers must be returned to the volunteer or discarded.P
(c) Food obtained from licensed establishments may be donated to other facilities if the food is held under proper
temperature control and protected from contamination during serving;
(d) At least one portable handwashing facility as described in Section 5-203.11(C) shall be provided at the service
location;Pf
(e) Self-service of food is limited to packaged or wrapped items and condiments dispensed in a sanitary manner;
(f) A statement must be posted at the meal site in public view that states: “Notice: Food served at this location may
not have been inspected by the regulatory authority.”Pf
(g) Food must be stored, prepared, handled, transported and served in a manner that is consistent with the food
safety requirements in these rules.
3-201.12 Food in a Hermetically Sealed Container.
Food in a hermetically sealed container shall be obtained from a food processing plant that is regulated by the food regulatory
agency that has jurisdiction over the plant. P
24
3-201.13 Fluid Milk and Milk Products.
Fluid milk and milk products shall be obtained from sources that comply with Grade A standards as specified in law. P
3-201.14 Fish.
(A) Fish that are received for sale or service shall be:
(1) Commercially and legally caught or harvested;P or
(2) Approved for sale or service.P
(B) Molluscan shellfish that are recreationally caught may not be received for sale or service.P
3-201.15 Molluscan Shellfish.
(A) Molluscan shellfish shall be obtained from sources according to law and the requirements specified in the U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services, Public Health Service, Food and Drug Administration, National Shellfish
Sanitation Program Guide for the Control of Molluscan Shellfish.P
(B) Molluscan shellfish received in interstate commerce shall be from sources that are listed in the Interstate Certified
Shellfish Shippers List. P
3-201.16 Wild Mushrooms.
(A) Except as specified in (B), identification of mushroom species picked in the wild shall have a written buyer specification
which is to remain on file in the food establishment for a minimum of 90 days from the date of sale or service.Pf This written
specification shall include:
(1) Identification by the scientific name and the common name of the mushroom species;P
(2) Identification in the fresh state;Pf
(3) The name and contact information of the person who identified the mushroom and the mushroom seller;Pf and
(4) A statement as to the qualifications and training of the identifier, specifically related to mushroom identification.Pf
(B) Paragraph (A) of 3-201.16 does not apply to cultivated wild mushroom species that are grown, harvested, and processed
in an operation that is regulated by the food regulatory agency that has jurisdiction over the operation.
(C) The food establishment that sells, uses or serves mushrooms picked in the wild shall ensure the mushrooms are
conspicuously identified by a label, placard, or menu notation that states:
(1) The common and usual name of the mushroom;Pf and
(2) The statement “Wild mushrooms: not an inspected product”.Pf
3-201.17 Game Animals.
A) If game animals are received for sale or service they shall be:
(1) Commercially raised for food P and:
(a) Raised, slaughtered, and processed under a voluntary inspection program that is conducted by the agency that has
animal health jurisdiction, P or
(b) Under a routine inspection program conducted by a regulatory agency other than the agency that has animal
health jurisdiction, P and
(c) Raised, slaughtered, and processed according to:
(i) Laws governing meat and poultry as determined by the agency that has animal health jurisdiction and the
agency that conducts the inspection program, P and
(ii) Requirements which are developed by the agency that has animal health jurisdiction and the agency that
conducts the inspection program with consideration of factors such as the need for antemortem and postmortem
examination by an approved veterinarian or veterinarian's designee; P
(2) Under a voluntary inspection program administered by the USDA for game animals such as exotic animals (reindeer,
elk, deer, antelope, water buffalo, or bison) that are "inspected and approved" in accordance with 9 CFR 352 Exotic
animals; voluntary inspection or rabbits that are "inspected and certified" in accordance with 9 CFR 354 voluntary
inspection of rabbits and edible products thereof; P
(3) As allowed by law, for wild game animals that are live-caught:
(a) Under a routine inspection program conducted by a regulatory agency such as the agency that has animal health
jurisdiction, P and
(b) Slaughtered and processed according to:
(i) Laws governing meat and poultry as determined by the agency that has animal health jurisdiction and the
agency that conducts the inspection program, P and
(ii) Requirements which are developed by the agency that has animal health jurisdiction and the agency that
conducts the inspection program with consideration of factors such as the need for antemortem and postmortem
examination by an approved veterinarian or veterinarian's designee; P or
25
(4) As allowed by law, for field-dressed wild game animals under a routine inspection program that ensures the animals:
(a) Receive a postmortem examination by an approved veterinarian or veterinarian's designee, P or
(b) Are field-dressed and transported according to requirements specified by the agency that has animal health
jurisdiction and the agency that conducts the inspection program, P and
(c) Are processed according to laws governing meat and poultry as determined by the agency that has animal health
jurisdiction and the agency that conducts the inspection program. P
(5) Except as specified in ¶¶ (A)(1) through (4) of section 3-201.17,
(a) Game meat donated to a charitable organization and inspected by employees of the Oregon Department of
Agriculture, Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife, or State Police as provided for in ORS 619.095 may be served
for human consumption by that charitable organization.P
(b) As used in subparagraph (a) of this section:
(i) Charitable organization means the Department of Human Services, Oregon Health Authority, Oregon Youth
Authority, Department of Corrections institutions, low-income nutritional centers, public school nutritional
centers, senior nutritional centers, state hospitals and other charitable organizations or public institutions
approved by the Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife.
(ii) Game meat includes antelope, bighorn sheep, deer, elk, moose and mountain goat.
(B) A game animal may not be received for sale or service if it is a species of wildlife that is listed in 50 CFR 17 Endangered
and Threatened Wildlife and Plants.
3-201.18 Outdoor Cooking and Beverage Dispensing.
(A) Outdoor cooking and beverage dispensing by a food establishment shall be allowed as a part of the operation when
conducted on the premises of the food establishment.Pf
(B) Enclosure of an outdoor cooking and beverage dispensing operation is not required unless necessary to protect food from
contamination. The outdoor cooking and beverage dispensing operation must be designed to protect food, equipment,
utensils, single-use articles and other items from contamination when not in operation.
(C) Outdoor cooking and beverage dispensing operations must be equipped with or located adjacent to a plumbed
handwashing sink. Outdoor cooking and beverage dispensing operations that are not permanently constructed may provide a
handwashing system that meets the requirements of 5-203.11(C) if approved by the regulatory authority.Pf
(D) Outdoor cooking shall be limited to the use of a barbeque, hearth oven, tandoori oven, barbeque pit or other similar
cooking equipment. The use of equipment such as flat top grills or griddles, woks, steamtables or other cooking, storage or
holding devices is not allowed.Pf
(E) Other than cooking food, no preparation, assembly, storage or service of food may be done at the outdoor cooking
operation. Non-potentially hazardous (non-TCS) condiments may be dispensed at the outdoor cooking operation.Pf
(F) Employees or consumers may be served directly from the outdoor cooking operation if the food is portioned for
immediate service. Consumers may not serve themselves from an outdoor cooking operation.
(G) Outdoor beverage dispensing may include alcoholic and other beverages. Consumers may serve themselves from
beverage dispensing equipment that meets the requirements of 4-204.13.
(H) Outdoor cooking and beverage dispensing operations must be monitored by food service employees.
(I) Section 3-201.18 does not preclude the service of foods prepared inside the establishment to consumers at outdoor seating
areas.
3-202.11 Temperature.
(A) Except as specified in ¶ (B) of this section, refrigerated, potentially hazardous food (time/temperature control for safety
food) shall be at a temperature of 5oC (41oF) or below when received. P
(B) If a temperature other than 5°C (41°F) for a potentially hazardous food (time/temperature control for safety food) is
specified in law governing its distribution, such as laws governing milk and molluscan shellfish, the food may be received at
the specified temperature.
(C) Raw eggs shall be received in refrigerated equipment that maintains an ambient air temperature of 7oC (45oF) or less. P
(D) Potentially hazardous food (time/temperature control for safety food) that is cooked to a temperature and for a time
specified under §§ 3-401.11 - 3-401.13 and received hot shall be at a temperature of 57oC (135oF) or above. P
(E) A food that is labeled frozen and shipped frozen by a food processing plant shall be received frozen. Pf
(F) Upon receipt, potentially hazardous food (time/temperature control for safety food) shall be free of evidence of previous
temperature abuse. Pf
26
3-202.12 Additives.
Food may not contain unapproved food additives or additives that exceed amounts specified in 21 CFR 170-180 relating to
food additives, generally recognized as safe or prior sanctioned substances that exceed amounts specified in 21 CFR 181-186,
substances that exceed amounts specified in 9 CFR Subpart C Section 424.21(b) Food ingredients and sources of radiation, or
pesticide residues that exceed provisions specified in 40 CFR 180 Tolerances for pesticides chemicals in food, and
exceptions. P
3-202.13 Shell Eggs.
Eggs shall be received clean and sound and may not exceed the restricted egg tolerances for U.S. Consumer Grade B as
specified in United States Standards, Grades, and Weight Classes for Shell Eggs, AMS 56.200 et seq., administered by the
Agricultural Marketing Service of USDA. P
3-202.14 Eggs and Milk Products, Pasteurized.
(A) Egg products shall be obtained pasteurized. P
(B) Fluid and dry milk and milk products shall:
(1) Be obtained pasteurized; P and
(2) Comply with Grade A standards as specified in law. P
(C) Frozen milk products, such as ice cream, shall be obtained pasteurized as specified in 21 CFR 135 - Frozen desserts. P
(D) Cheese shall be obtained pasteurized unless alternative procedures to pasteurization are specified in the CFR, such as
21 CFR 133 - Cheeses and related cheese products, for curing certain cheese varieties. P
(E) Raw milk from goats and sheep that is in compliance with the labeling requirements in OAR 603-024-0543 and the
standards defined in OAR 603-024-0041 may be sold in licensed Oregon Department of Agriculture establishments.P
3-202.15 Package Integrity.
Food packages shall be in good condition and protect the integrity of the contents so that the food is not exposed to
adulteration or potential contaminants.Pf
3-202.16 Ice.
Ice for use as a food or a cooling medium shall be made from drinking water. P
3-202.17 Shucked Shellfish, Packaging and Identification.
(A) Raw shucked shellfish shall be obtained in nonreturnable packages which bear a legible label that identifies the: Pf
(1) Name, address, and certification number of the shucker, packer or repacker of the molluscan shellfish; Pf and
(2) The "sell by" or "best if used by" date for packages with a capacity of less than 1.89 L (one-half gallon) or the date
shucked for packages with a capacity of 1.89 L (one-half gallon) or more. Pf
(B) A package of raw shucked shellfish that does not bear a label or which bears a label which does not contain all the
information as specified under ¶ (A) of this section shall be subject to a hold order, as allowed by law, or seizure and
destruction in accordance with 21 CFR Subpart D - Specific Administrative Decisions Regarding Interstate Shipments,
Section 1240.60(d) Molluscan shellfish.
3-202.18 Shellstock Identification.
(A) shellstock shall be obtained in containers bearing legible source identification tags or labels that are affixed by the
harvester or dealer that depurates, ships, or reships the shellstock, as specified in the National Shellfish Sanitation Program
Guide for the Control of Molluscan Shellfish, and that list: Pf
(1) [Deleted]
(2) Except as specified in ¶ (D) of this section, on each dealer's tag or label, the following information in the following
order: Pf
(a) The dealer's name and address, and the certification number assigned by the shellfish control authority, Pf
(b) The original shipper's certification number including the abbreviation of the name of the state or country in
which the shellfish are harvested, Pf
(c) The same information as specified for a harvester's tag under Subparagraphs (A)(1)(b)-(d) of this section, Pf and
(d) The following statement in bold, capitalized type: "This tag is required to be attached until container is empty
and thereafter kept on file for 90 days." Pf
(B) A container of shellstock that does not bear a tag or label or that bears a tag or label that does not contain all the
information as specified under ¶ (A) of this section shall be subject to a hold order, as allowed by law, or seizure and
destruction in accordance with 21 CFR Subpart D - Specific Administrative Decisions Regarding Interstate Shipments,
Section 1240.60(d).
27
(C) If a place is provided on the harvester's tag or label for a dealer's name, address, and certification number, the dealer's
information shall be listed first.
(D) If the harvester's tag or label is designed to accommodate each dealer's identification as specified under Subparagraphs
(A)(2)(a) and (b) of this section, individual dealer tags or labels need not be provided.
3-202.19 Shellstock, Condition.
When received by a food establishment, shellstock shall be reasonably free of mud, dead shellfish, and shellfish with broken
shells. Dead shellfish or shellstock with badly broken shells shall be discarded.
3-202.110 Juice Treated.
Pre-packaged juice shall:
(A) Be obtained from a processor with a HACCP system as specified in 21 CFR Part 120 Hazard Analysis and Critical
Control (HACCP) Systems; Pf and
(B) Be obtained pasteurized or otherwise treated to attain a 5-log reduction of the most resistant microorganism of public
health significance as specified in 21 CFR Part 120.24 Process Controls. P
3-203.11 Molluscan Shellfish, Original Container.
(A) Except as specified in ¶¶ (B) - (D) of this section, molluscan shellfish may not be removed from the container in which
they are received other than immediately before sale or preparation for service.
(B) For display purposes, shellstock may be removed from the container in which they are received, displayed on drained
ice, or held in a display container, and a quantity specified by a consumer may be removed from the display or display
container and provided to the consumer if:
(1) The source of the shellstock on display is identified as specified under § 3-202.18 and recorded as specified under
§ 3-203.12; and
(2) The shellstock are protected from contamination.
(C) Shucked shellfish may be removed from the container in which they were received and held in a display container from
which individual servings are dispensed upon a consumer's request if:
(1) The labeling information for the shellfish on display as specified under § 3-202.17 is retained and correlated to the
date when, or dates during which, the shellfish are sold or served; and
(2) The shellfish are protected from contamination.
(3) If the establishment serves raw or undercooked shucked molluscan shellfish for immediate consumption, container
label information must be maintained in the establishment for 90 days.Pf
(D) Shucked shellfish may be removed from the container in which they were received and repacked in consumer self service
containers where allowed by law if:
(1) The labeling information for the shellfish is on each consumer self service container as specified under § 3-202.17
and ¶¶ 3-602.11(A) and (B)(1) - (5);
(2) The labeling information as specified under § 3-202.17 is retained and correlated with the date when, or dates
during which, the shellfish are sold or served;
(3) The labeling information and dates specified under Subparagraph (D)(2) of this section are maintained for 90 days;
and
(4) The shellfish are protected from contamination.
3-203.12 Shellstock, Maintaining Identification.
(A) Except as specified under Subparagraph (C) (2) of this section, shellstock tags or labels shall remain attached to the
container in which the shellstock are received until the container is empty. Pf
(B) The date when the last shellstock from the container is sold or served shall be recorded on the tag or label. Pf
(C) The identity of the source of shellstock that are sold or served shall be maintained by retaining shellstock tags or labels
for 90 calendar days from the date that is recorded on the tag or label, as specified under ¶ B of this section, by: Pf
(1) Using an approved record keeping system that keeps the tags or labels in chronological order correlated to the date
that is recorded on the tag or label, as specified under ¶ B of this section; Pf and
(2) If shellstock are removed from its tagged or labeled container:
(a) Preserving source identification by using a record keeping system as specified under Subparagraph (C)(1) of this
section, Pf and
(b) Ensuring that shellstock from one tagged or labeled container are not commingled with shellstock from another
container with different certification numbers; different harvest dates; or different growing areas as identified on the
tag or label before being ordered by the consumer. Pf
28
3-3 PROTECTION FROM CONTAMINATION AFTER RECEIVING
Subparts 3-301 Preventing Contamination by Employee
3-302 Preventing Food and Ingredient Contamination
3-303 Preventing Contamination from Ice Used as a Coolant
3-304 Preventing Contamination from Equipment, Utensils, and
Linens
3-305 Preventing Contamination from the Premises
3-306 Preventing Contamination by Consumers
3-307 Preventing Contamination from Other Sources
3-301.11 Preventing Contamination from Hands.
(A) Food employees shall wash their hands as specified under §§ 2-301.12 and 2-301.13.
(B) Food employees shall minimize bare hand contact with food and shall use suitable utensils such as deli tissue, spatulas,
tongs, single-use gloves, or dispensing equipment.P/Pf
3-301.12 Preventing Contamination when Tasting.
A food employee may not use a utensil more than once to taste food that is to be sold or served. P
3-302.11 Packaged and Unpackaged Food - Separation, Packaging, and Segregation.
(A) Food shall be protected from cross contamination by:
(1) Except as specified in (1)(c) below, separating raw animal foods during storage, preparation, holding, and display
from:
(a) Raw ready-to-eat food including other raw animal food such as fish for sushi or molluscan shellfish, or other raw
ready-to-eat food such as fruits and vegetables, P and
(b) Cooked ready-to-eat food; P
(c) Frozen, commercially processed and packaged raw animal food may be stored or displayed with or above
frozen, commercially processed and packaged, ready-to-eat food.
(2) Except when combined as ingredients, separating types of raw animal foods from each other such as beef, fish, lamb,
pork, and poultry during storage, preparation, holding, and display by:
(a) Using separate equipment for each type, P or
(b) Arranging each type of food in equipment so that cross contamination of one type with another is prevented, P
and
(c) Preparing each type of food at different times or in separate areas; P
(3) Cleaning equipment and utensils as specified under ¶ 4-602.11(A) and sanitizing as specified under § 4-703.11;
(4) Except as specified under Subparagraph 3-501.15(B)(2) and in ¶ (B) of this section, storing the food in packages,
covered containers, or wrappings;
(5) Cleaning hermetically sealed containers of food of visible soil before opening;
(6) Protecting food containers that are received packaged together in a case or overwrap from cuts when the case or
overwrap is opened;
(7) Storing damaged, spoiled, or recalled food being held in the food establishment as specified under § 6-404.11; and
(8) Separating fruits and vegetables, before they are washed as specified under § 3-302.15 from ready-to-eat food.
(B) Subparagraph (A)(4) of this section does not apply to:
(1) Whole, uncut, raw fruits and vegetables and nuts in the shell, that require peeling or hulling before consumption;
(2) Primal cuts, quarters, or sides of raw meat or slab bacon that are hung on clean, sanitized hooks or placed on clean,
sanitized racks;
(3) Whole, uncut, processed meats such as country hams, and smoked or cured sausages that are placed on clean,
sanitized racks;
(4) Food being cooled as specified under Subparagraph 3-501.15(B)(2); or
(5) Shellstock.
3-302.12 Food Storage Containers, Identified with Common Name of Food.
Except for containers holding food that can be readily and unmistakably recognized such as dry pasta, working containers
holding food or food ingredients that are removed from their original packages for use in the food establishment, such as
cooking oils, flour, herbs, potato flakes, salt, spices, and sugar shall be identified with the common name of the food.
29
3-302.13 Pasteurized Eggs, Substitute for Raw Shell Eggs for Certain Recipes.
Pasteurized eggs or egg products shall be substituted for raw shell eggs in the preparation of foods such as Caesar salad,
hollandaise or Béarnaise sauce, mayonnaise, meringue, eggnog, ice cream, and egg-fortified beverages that are not: P
(A) Cooked as specified under Subparagraphs 3-401.11(A)(1) or (2);P or
(B) Included in Subparagraph 3-401.11(D).P
3-302.14 Protection from Unapproved Additives.
(A) Food shall be protected from contamination that may result from the addition of, as specified in § 3-202.12:
(1) Unsafe or unapproved food or color additives;P and
(2) Unsafe or unapproved levels of approved food and color additives.P
(B) A food employee may not:
(1) Apply sulfiting agents to fresh fruits and vegetables intended for raw consumption or to a food considered to be a
good source of vitamin B ;P or
1
(2) Except for grapes, serve or sell food specified under Subparagraph (B)(1) of this section that is treated with sulfiting
agents before receipt by the food establishment.P
3-302.15 Washing Fruits and Vegetables.
(A) Except as specified in ¶ (B) of this section and except for whole, raw fruits and vegetables that are intended for washing
by the consumer before consumption, raw fruits and vegetables shall be thoroughly washed in water to remove soil and other
contaminants before being cut, combined with other ingredients, cooked, served, or offered for human consumption in ready-
to-eat form.
(B) Fruits and vegetables may be washed by using chemicals as specified under § 7-204.12.
3-303.11 Ice Used as Exterior Coolant, Prohibited as Ingredient.
After use as a medium for cooling the exterior surfaces of food such as melons or fish, packaged foods such as canned
beverages, or cooling coils and tubes of equipment, ice may not be used as food. P
3-303.12 Storage or Display of Food in Contact with Water or Ice.
(A) Packaged food may not be stored in direct contact with ice or water if the food is subject to the entry of water because of
the nature of its packaging, wrapping, or container or its positioning in the ice or water.
(B) Except as specified in ¶¶ (C) and (D) of this section, unpackaged food may not be stored in direct contact with undrained
ice.
(C) Whole, raw fruits or vegetables; cut, raw vegetables such as celery or carrot sticks or cut potatoes; and tofu may be
immersed in ice or water.
(D) Raw poultry and raw fish that are received immersed in ice in shipping containers may remain in that condition while in
storage awaiting preparation, display, service, or sale.
3-304.11 Food Contact with Equipment and Utensils.
Food shall only contact surfaces of:
(A) Equipment and utensils that are cleaned as specified under Part 4-6 of this Code and sanitized as specified under Part 4-7
of this Code; P or
(B) Single-service and single-use articles. P
3-304.12 In-Use Utensils, Between-Use Storage.
During pauses in food preparation or dispensing, food preparation and dispensing utensils shall be stored:
(A) Except as specified under ¶ (B) of this section, in the food with their handles above the top of the food and the container;
(B) In food that is not potentially hazardous (time/temperature control for safety food) with their handles above the top of the
food within containers or equipment that can be closed, such as bins of sugar, flour, or cinnamon;
(C) On a clean portion of the food preparation table or cooking equipment only if the in-use utensil and the food-contact
surface of the food preparation table or cooking equipment are cleaned and sanitized at a frequency specified under §§
4-602.11 and 4-702.11;
(D) In running water of sufficient velocity to flush particulates to the drain, if used with moist food such as ice cream or
mashed potatoes;
(E) In a clean, protected location if the utensils, such as ice scoops, are used only with a food that is not potentially hazardous
(time/temperature control for safety food); or
30
(F) In a container of water if the container is cleaned at a frequency specified under Subparagraph 4-602.11(D)(7); and
(1) The water is maintained at a temperature of 135 degrees Fahrenheit or above; or
(2) At 41 degrees Fahrenheit or less.
3-304.13 Linens and Napkins, Use Limitation.
Linens and napkins may not be used in contact with food unless they are used to line a container for the service of foods and
the linens and napkins are replaced each time the container is refilled for a new consumer.
3-304.14 Wiping Cloths, Use Limitation.
(A) Cloths in-use for wiping food spills from tableware and carry-out containers that occur as food is being served shall be:
(1) Maintained dry; and
(2) Used for no other purpose.
(B) Cloths in-use for wiping counters and other equipment surfaces shall be:
(1) Held between uses in a chemical sanitizer solution at a concentration specified under § 4-501.114; and
(2) Laundered daily as specified under ¶ 4-802.11(D).
(C) Cloths in-use for wiping surfaces in contact with raw animal foods shall be kept separate from cloths used for other
purposes.
(D) Dry wiping cloths and the chemical sanitizing solutions specified in Subparagraph (B)(1) of this section in which wet
wiping cloths are held between uses shall be free of food debris and visible soil.
(E) Containers of chemical sanitizing solutions specified in Subparagraph (B)(1) of this section in which wet wiping cloths
are held between uses shall be stored off the floor and used in a manner that prevents contamination of food, equipment,
utensils, linens, single-service, or single-use articles.
(F) Single-use disposable sanitizer wipes shall be used in accordance with EPA-approved manufacturer's label use
instructions.
3-304.15 Gloves, Use Limitation.
(A) If used, single-use gloves shall be used for only one task such as working with ready-to-eat food or with raw animal food,
used for no other purpose, and discarded when damaged or soiled, or when interruptions occur in the operation.P
(B) Except as specified in ¶ (C) of this section, slash-resistant gloves that are used to protect the hands during operations
requiring cutting shall be used in direct contact only with food that is subsequently cooked as specified under Part 3-4 such as
frozen food or a primal cut of meat.
(C) Slash-resistant gloves may be used with ready-to-eat food that will not be subsequently cooked if the slash-resistant
gloves have a smooth, durable, and nonabsorbent outer surface; or if the slash-resistant gloves are covered with a smooth,
durable, nonabsorbent glove, or a single-use glove.
(D) Cloth gloves may not be used in direct contact with food unless the food is subsequently cooked as required under
Part 3-4 such as frozen food or a primal cut of meat.
(E) The use of latex gloves in food service establishments is prohibited.
3-304.16 Using Clean Tableware for Second Portions and Refills.
(A) Except for refilling a consumer’s drinking cup or container without contact between the pouring utensil and the lip-
contact area of the drinking cup or container, food employees may not use tableware, including single-service articles, soiled
by the consumer, to provide second portions or refills.
(B) Except as specified in ¶ (C) of this section, self-service consumers may not be allowed to use soiled tableware, including
single-service articles, to obtain additional food from the display and serving equipment.
(C) Drinking cups and containers may be reused by self-service consumers if refilling is a contamination-free process as
specified under ¶¶ 4-204.13(A), (B), and (D).
3-304.17 Refilling Returnables.
(A) Except as specified in (B) – (F) of this section, empty food containers returned to a food establishment for cleaning and
refilling with food shall be cleaned and refilled in a food processing plant.
(B) A container may be refilled at a food establishment with food if the container:
(1) Is designed and constructed for reuse and in accordance with the requirements specified under Parts 4-1 and 4-2;
(2) Was initially provided by the food establishment to the consumer;
31
(3) Is returned to the food establishment or a designated collection point by the consumer;
(4) Is subject to the following actions by the food establishment before being refilled:
(a) Cleaned as specified under Part 4-6 and (C) of this section;
(b) Sanitized as specified under Part 4-7; and
(c) Verified to continue to meet the requirements specified under Parts 4-1 and 4-2
(C) A container may be refilled at a food establishment with beverage if:
(1) The design of the container and the nature of the beverage, when considered together, allow effective cleaning at
home or in the food establishment;
(2) The consumer-owned container returned to the food establishment for refilling is refilled for sale or service only
to the same consumer: and
(3) The container is refilled by:
(a) An employee of the food establishment; or
(b) The owner of the container if the beverage system includes a contamination-free transfer process as
specified under ¶¶ 4-204.13 (A), (B), and (D) that cannot be bypassed by the consumer.
(D) Consumer-owned containers that are not food-specific may be filled at a water vending machine or system.
(E) If a food establishment has written procedures prepared in advance and maintained at the food establishment that are
made available to the regulatory authority upon request that specify its written procedures for compliance with this Part 3-
304.17(E), a food establishment may:
(1) Allow consumers to refill a visibly clean consumer-owned container meeting the requirements of Parts 4-
101.11, 4-201.11 and 4-202.11(A) with non-ready-to-eat food, bulk food, and packaged food;
(2) Permit employees to refill a visibly clean consumer-owned container meeting the requirements of Parts 4-101.11,
4-201.11 and 4-202.11(A) with food using a contamination free process.
(F) A food establishment may allow consumers to refill a visibly clean consumer owned container with nuts in the shell and
whole and raw fruits and vegetables or that are intended to be washed by the consumer before consumption.
3-305.11 Food Storage.
(A) Except as specified in ¶¶ (B) and (C) of this section, food shall be protected from contamination by storing the food:
(1) In a clean, dry location;
(2) Where it is not exposed to splash, dust, or other contamination; and
(3) At least 15 cm (6 inches) above the floor.
(B) Food in packages and working containers may be stored less than 15 cm (6 inches) above the floor on case lot handling
equipment as specified under § 4-204.122.
(C) Pressurized beverage containers, cased food in waterproof containers such as bottles or cans, and milk containers in
plastic crates may be stored on a floor that is clean and not exposed to floor moisture.
3-305.12 Food Storage, Prohibited Areas.
Food may not be stored:
(A) In locker rooms;
(B) In toilet rooms;
(C) In dressing rooms;
(D) In garbage rooms;
(E) In mechanical rooms;
(F) Under sewer lines that are not shielded to intercept potential drips;
(G) Under leaking water lines, including leaking automatic fire sprinkler heads, or under lines on which water has condensed;
(H) Under open stairwells; or
(I) Under other sources of contamination.
3-305.13 Vended Potentially Hazardous Food, Original Container.
Potentially hazardous food (time/temperature control for safety food) dispensed through a vending machine shall be in the
package in which it was placed at the food establishment or food processing plant at which it was prepared.
3-305.14 Food Preparation.
During preparation, unpackaged food shall be protected from environmental sources of contamination.
3-306.11 Food Display.
Except for nuts in the shell and whole, raw fruits and vegetables that are intended for hulling, peeling, or washing by the
consumer before consumption, food on display shall be protected from contamination by the use of packaging; counter,
32
service line, or salad bar food guards; display cases; or other effective means.Pf
3-306.12 Condiments, Protection.
(A) Condiments shall be protected from contamination by being kept in dispensers that are designed to provide protection,
protected food displays provided with the proper utensils, original containers designed for dispensing, or individual packages
or portions.Pf
(B) Condiments at a vending machine location shall be in individual packages or provided in dispensers that are filled at an
approved location, such as the food establishment that provides food to the vending machine location, a food processing plant
that is regulated by the agency that has jurisdiction over the operation, or a properly equipped facility that is located on the
site of the vending machine location.Pf
3-306.13 Consumer Self Service Operations.
(A) Raw, unpackaged animal food, such as beef, lamb, pork, poultry, and fish may not be offered for consumer self-service. P
This paragraph does not apply to:
(1) Consumer self-service of ready-to-eat foods at buffets or salad bars that serve foods such as sushi or raw shellfish;
(2) Ready-to-cook individual portions for immediate cooking and consumption on the premises such as consumer-cooked
meats or consumer-selected ingredients for Mongolian barbecue; or
(3) Raw, frozen, shell-on shrimp, or lobster.
(B) Consumer self-service operations for ready-to-eat foods shall be provided with suitable utensils or effective dispensing
methods that protect the food from contamination. Pf
(C) Consumer self-service operations such as buffets and salad bars shall be monitored by food employees trained in safe
operating procedures. Pf
3-306.14 Returned Food and Reservice of Food.
(A) Except as specified in ¶ (B) of this section, after being served or sold and in the possession of a consumer, food that is
unused or returned by the consumer may not be offered as food for human consumption.P
(B) Except as specified under ¶ 3-801.11(G), a container of food that is not potentially hazardous may be transferred from
one consumer to another if:
(1) The food is dispensed so that it is protected from contamination and the container is closed between uses, such as a
narrow-neck bottle containing catsup, steak sauce, or wine; or
(2) The food, such as crackers, salt, or pepper, is in an unopened original package and is maintained in sound condition.
3-307.11 Miscellaneous Sources of Contamination.
Food shall be protected from contamination that may result from a factor or source not specified under Subparts 3-301 -
3-306.
3-307.12 Protection from Contamination, Use of Private Vehicles for Food Deliveries.
(A) Private vehicles may be used for food deliveries if the food is packaged so that it is protected from contamination under
Part 3-3, and adequate means are provided for maintaining proper food temperatures under §3-501.16.
(B) Private vehicles shall not be used in any activity that is incompatible with safe and sanitary transportation of food.
3-4 DESTRUCTION OF ORGANISMS OF PUBLIC HEALTH CONCERN
Subparts 3-401 Cooking
3-402 Freezing
3-403 Reheating
3-401.11 Raw Animal Foods.
(A) Except as specified under ¶ (B) and in ¶¶ (C) and (D) of this section, raw animal foods such as eggs, fish, meat, poultry,
and foods containing these raw animal foods, shall be cooked to heat all parts of the food to a temperature and for a time that
complies with one of the following methods based on the food that is being cooked:
(1) 63oC (145oF) or above for 15 seconds for: P
(a) Raw eggs that are broken and prepared in response to a consumer's order and for immediate service, P and
(b) Except as specified under Subparagraphs (A)(2) and (A)(3) and ¶ (B), and in ¶ (C) of this section, fish and meat
including game animals commercially raised for food as specified under Subparagraph 3-201.17(A)(1) and game
33
animals under a voluntary inspection program as specified under Subparagraph 3-201.17(A)(2); P
(2) 68oC (155oF) for 15 seconds or the temperature specified in the following chart that corresponds to the holding time
for ratites, mechanically tenderized, and injected meats; the following if they are comminuted: fish, meat, game animals
commercially raised for food as specified under Subparagraph 3-201.17(A)(1), and game animals under a voluntary
inspection program as specified under Subparagraph 3-201.17(A)(2); and raw eggs that are not prepared as specified
under Subparagraph (A)(1)(a) of this section: P
Minimum Temperature Minimum Time
oC (oF)
63 (145) 3 minutes
66 (150) 1 minute
70 (158) < 1 second instantaneous)
;or
(3) 74oC (165oF) or above for 15 seconds for poultry, baluts, wild game animals as specified under Subparagraphs 3-
201.17(A)(3) and (4), stuffed fish, stuffed meat, stuffed pasta, stuffed poultry, stuffed ratites, or stuffing containing fish,
meat, poultry, or ratites. P
34
(B) Whole meat roasts including beef, corned beef, lamb, pork, and cured pork roasts such as ham shall be cooked:
(1) In an oven that is preheated to the temperature specified for the roast's weight in the following chart and that is held
at that temperature: Pf
Oven Type Oven Temperature Based on Roast Weight
Less than 4.5 kg (10 lbs) 4.5 kg (10 lbs) or More
Still Dry 177oC (350oF) or more 121oC (250oF) or more
Convection 163oC (325oF) or more 121oC (250oF) or more
High Humidity1 121oC (250oF) or less 121oC (250oF) or less
1 Relative humidity greater than 90% for at least 1 hour as measured in the cooking chamber or exit of the
oven; or in a moisture-impermeable bag that provides 100% humidity.
;and
(2) As specified in the following chart, to heat all parts of the food to a temperature and for the holding time that
corresponds to that temperature: P
Temperature Time1 in Temperature Time1 in
°C (°F) Minutes °C (°F) Seconds
54.4 (130) 112 63.9 (147) 134
55.0 (131) 89 65.0 (149) 85
56.1 (133) 56 66.1 (151) 54
57.2 (135) 36 67.2 (153) 34
57.8 (136) 28 68.3 (155) 22
58.9 (138) 18 69.4 (157) 14
60.0 (140) 12 70.0 (158) 0
61.1 (142) 8
62.2 (144) 5
62.8 (145) 4
1 Holding time may include postoven heat rise.
(C) A raw or undercooked whole-muscle, intact beef steak may be served or offered for sale in a ready-to-eat form if:
(1) The food establishment serves a population that is not a highly susceptible population,
(2) The steak is labeled to indicate that it meets the definition of "whole-muscle, intact beef" as specified under ¶ 3-
201.11(E), and
(3) The steak is cooked on both the top and bottom to a surface temperature of 63oC (145oF) or above and a cooked
color change is achieved on all external surfaces.
(D) A raw animal food such as raw egg, raw fish, raw-marinated fish, raw molluscan shellfish, or steak tartare; or a
partially cooked food such as lightly cooked fish, soft cooked eggs, or rare meat other than whole-muscle, intact beef steaks
as specified in ¶ (C) of this section, may be served or offered for sale upon consumer request or selection in a ready-to-eat
form if:
(1) As specified under ¶¶ 3-801.11(C)(1) and (2), the food establishment serves a population that is not a highly
susceptible population;
(2) The food, if served or offered for service by consumer selection from a children's menu, does not contain comminuted
meat; Pf and
(3) The consumer is informed as specified under § 3-603.11 that to ensure its safety, the food should be cooked as
specified under ¶ (A) or (B) of this section; or
(4) The regulatory authority grants a variance from ¶ (A) or (B) of this section as specified in § 8-103.10 based on a
HACCP plan that:
(a) Is submitted by the permit holder and approved as specified under § 8-103.11,
(b) Documents scientific data or other information showing that a lesser time and temperature regimen results in a
safe food, and
(c) Verifies that equipment and procedures for food preparation and training of food employees at the food
35
establishment meet the conditions of the variance.
3-401.12 Microwave Cooking.
Raw animal foods cooked in a microwave oven shall be:
(A) Rotated or stirred throughout or midway during cooking to compensate for uneven distribution of heat;
(B) Covered to retain surface moisture;
(C) Heated to a temperature of at least 74oC (165oF) in all parts of the food;P and
(D) Allowed to stand covered for 2 minutes after cooking to obtain temperature equilibrium.
3-401.13 Plant Food Cooking for Hot Holding.
Fruits and vegetables that are cooked for hot holding shall be cooked to a temperature of 57oC (135oF).Pf
3-401.14 Non-Continuous Cooking of Raw Animal Foods.
Raw animal foods that are cooked using a non-continuous cooking process shall be:
(A) Subject to an initial heating process that is no longer than sixty minutes in duration; P
(B) Immediately after initial heating, cooled according to the time and temperature parameters specified for cooked
Potentially Hazardous food (Time /Temperature Control for Safety Food) under ¶ 3-501.14(A); P
(C) After cooling, held frozen or cold, as specified for Potentially Hazardous food (Time/Temperature Control for Safety
Food) under ¶ 3-501.16(A)(2); P
(D) Prior to sale or service, cooked using a process that heats all parts of the food to a temperature and for a time that
complies with one of the methods based upon the food being cooked as specified in 3-401.11.P
(E) Cooled according to the time and temperature parameters specified for cooked Potentially Hazardous food (Time
/Temperature Control for Safety Food) under ¶ 3-501.14(A) if not either hot held as specified under ¶3-501.16(A), served
immediately, or held using time as a public health control as specified under § 3-501.19 after complete cooking; P and
(F) Prepared and stored according to written procedures that:
(1) Have obtained prior approval from the regulatory authority; Pf
(2) Are maintained in the food establishment and are available to the regulatory authority upon request; Pf
(3) Describe how the requirements specified under ¶ (A)-(E) of this Section are to be monitored and documented by the
permit holder and the corrective actions to be taken if the requirements are not met; Pf
(4) Describe how the foods, after initial heating, but prior to complete cooking, are to be marked or otherwise identified as
foods that must be cooked as specified under ¶ (D) of this section prior to being offered for sale or service; Pf and
(5) Describe how foods, after initial heating but prior to cooking as specified in paragraph (D) of section 3-401.14, are to be
separated from ready-to-eat foods as specified under 3-302.11(A).Pf
3-402.11 Parasite Destruction.
(A) Except as specified in ¶ (B) of this section, before service or sale in ready-to-eat form, raw, raw-marinated, partially
cooked, or marinated-partially cooked fish shall be:
(1) Frozen and stored at a temperature of -20°C (-4°F) or below for a minimum of 168 hours (7 days) in a freezer; P
(2) Frozen at -35°C (-31°F) or below until solid and stored at -35°C (-31°F) or below for a minimum of 15 hours; P or
(3) Frozen at -35°C (-31°F) or below until solid and stored at -20°C (-4°F) or below for a minimum of 24 hours. P
(B) Paragraph (A) of this section does not apply to:
(1) Molluscan Shellfish;
(2)Tuna of the species Thunnus alalunga, Thunnus albacares (Yellowfin tuna), Thunnus atlanticus, Thunnus maccoyii
(Bluefin tuna, Southern), Thunnus obesus (Bigeye tuna), or Thunnus thynnus (Bluefin tuna, Northern), or fish species
that are listed in the FDA Fish and Fisheries Products Hazards and Control Guidance, Potential Species-Related &
Process Related Hazards and parasites are not a hazard; or
(3) Aquacultured fish, such as salmon, that
(a) If raised in open water, are raised in net-pens, or
(b) Are raised in land-based operations such as ponds or tanks; and
(c) Are fed formulated feed, such as pellets that contains no live parasites infective to the aquacultured fish.
(4) Fish eggs that have been removed from skein and rinsed.
3-402.12 Records, Creation and Retention.
(A) Except as specified in paragraphs 3-402.11(B) and 3-402.12(B), if raw, raw-marinated, partially cooked, or marinated-
partially cooked fish are served or sold in ready-to-eat form, the person in charge shall identify each batch by name and date,
measure the freezing temperature once per day, and record the temperature and time to which the fish are subjected and shall
retain the records at the food establishment in chronological order for 90 calendar days beyond the time of service or sale of
the fish.Pf
36
(B) If the fish are frozen by a supplier, a written agreement or statement from the supplier stipulating that the fish supplied
are frozen to a temperature and for a time specified under section 3-402.11 may substitute for the records specified under
paragraph (A) of section 3-402.12.Pf
(1) Each invoice received from the supplier shall state the specific fish by species that have been frozen to meet the
requirements for parasite destruction specified under section 3-402.11.Pf
(2) The written agreement or statement from the supplier must be updated at least once per year.Pf
(C) If raw, raw-marinated, partially cooked, or marinated-partially cooked fish are served or sold in ready-to-eat form, and
the fish are raised and fed as specified in Subparagraph 3-402.11(B)(3), a written agreement or statement from the supplier or
aquaculturist stipulating that the fish were raised and fed as specified in Subparagraph 3-402.11(B)(3) shall be obtained by
the person in charge and retained in the records of the food establishment for 90 calendar days beyond the time of service or
sale of the fish. Pf
3-403.10 Preparation for Immediate Service.
Cooked and refrigerated food that is prepared for immediate service in response to an individual consumer order, such as a
roast beef sandwich au jus, may be served at any temperature.
3-403.11 Reheating for Hot Holding.
(A) Except as specified under ¶¶ (B) and (C) and in ¶ (E) of this section, potentially hazardous food (time/temperature
control for safety food) that is cooked, cooled, and reheated for hot holding shall be reheated so that all parts of the food
reach a temperature of at least 74oC (165oF) for 15 seconds. P
(B) Except as specified under ¶ (C) of this section, potentially hazardous food (time/temperature control for safety food)
reheated in a microwave oven for hot holding shall be reheated so that all parts of the food reach a temperature of at least
74oC (165oF) and the food is rotated or stirred, covered, and allowed to stand covered for 2 minutes after reheating. P
(C) Ready-to-eat food taken from a commercially processed, hermetically sealed container, or from an intact package from a
food processing plant that is inspected by the food regulatory authority that has jurisdiction over the plant, shall be heated to a
temperature of at least 57oC (135oF) for hot holding. P
(D) Reheating for hot holding as specified under ¶¶ (A) - (C) of this section shall be done rapidly and the time the food is
between 5ºC (41ºF) and the temperatures specified under ¶¶ (A) - (C) of this section may not exceed 2 hours. P
(E) Remaining unsliced portions of meat roasts that are cooked as specified under ¶ 3-401.11(B) may be reheated for hot
holding using the oven parameters and minimum time and temperature conditions specified under ¶ 3-401.11(B).
3-404.11 Treating Juice.
Juice packaged in a food establishment shall be:
(A) Treated under a HACCP plan as specified in ¶¶ 8-201.14(B) - (E) to attain a 5-log reduction, which is equal to a
99.999% reduction, of the most resistant microorganism of public health significance; P or
(B) Labeled, if not treated to yield a 5-log reduction of the most resistant microorganism of public health significance: Pf
(1) As specified under § 3-602.11, Pf and
(2) As specified in 21 CFR 101.17(g) Food labeling, warning, notice, and safe handling statements, juices that have not
been specifically processed to prevent, reduce, or eliminate the presence of pathogens with the following, "WARNING:
This product has not been pasteurized and, therefore, may contain harmful bacteria that can cause serious illness in
children, the elderly, and persons with weakened immune systems."Pf
3-5 LIMITATION OF GROWTH OF ORGANISMS OF PUBLIC HEALTH CONCERN
Subparts 3-501 Temperature and Time Control
3-502 Specialized Processing Methods
3-501.11 Frozen Food.
Stored frozen foods shall be maintained frozen.
3-501.12 Potentially Hazardous Food.
Frozen potentially hazardous food (time/temperature control for safety food) that is slacked to moderate the temperature shall
be held:
(A) Under refrigeration that maintains the food temperature at 5oC (41oF) or less; or
(B) At any temperature if the food remains frozen.
37
3-501.13 Thawing.
Except as specified in ¶ (D) of this section, potentially hazardous food (time/temperature control for safety food) shall be
thawed:
(A) Under refrigeration that maintains the food temperature at 5oC (41oF) or less; or
(B) Completely submerged under running water:
(1) At a water temperature of 21oC (70oF) or below,
(2) With sufficient water velocity to agitate and float off loose particles in an overflow, and
(3) For a period of time that does not allow thawed portions of ready-to-eat food to rise above 5oC (41oF), or
(4) For a period of time that does not allow thawed portions of a raw animal food requiring cooking as specified under
¶ 3-401.11(A) or (B) to be above 5oC (41oF), for more than 4 hours including:
(a) The time the food is exposed to the running water and the time needed for preparation for cooking, or
(b) The time it takes under refrigeration to lower the food temperature to 5oC (41oF);(C) As part of a cooking
process if the food that is frozen is:
(1) Cooked as specified under ¶ 3-401.11(A) or (B) or § 3-401.12, or
(2) Thawed in a microwave oven and immediately transferred to conventional cooking equipment, with no interruption
in the process; or
(D) Using any procedure if a portion of frozen ready-to-eat food is thawed and prepared for immediate service in response to
an individual consumer's order.
3-501.14 Cooling.
(A) Cooked potentially hazardous food (time/temperature control for safety food) shall be cooled:
(1) Within 2 hours from 57ºC (135ºF) to 21ºC (70°F); P and
(2) Within a total of 6 hours from 57ºC (135ºF) to 5ºC (41°F) or less. P
(B) Potentially hazardous food (time/temperature control for safety food) shall be cooled within 4 hours to 5oC (41oF) or less
if prepared from ingredients at ambient temperature, such as reconstituted foods and canned tuna. P
(C) Except as specified under ¶ (D) of this section, a potentially hazardous food (time/temperature control for safety food)
received in compliance with laws allowing a temperature above 5oC (41oF) during shipment from the supplier as specified in
¶ 3-202.11(B), shall be cooled within 4 hours to 5oC (41oF) or less. P
(D) Raw eggs shall be received as specified under ¶ 3-202.11(C) and immediately placed in refrigerated equipment that
maintains an ambient air temperature of 7oC (45oF) or less. P
3-501.15 Cooling Methods.
(A) Cooling shall be accomplished in accordance with the time and temperature criteria specified under § 3-501.14 by using
one or more of the following methods based on the type of food being cooled:
(1) Placing the food in shallow pans; Pf
(2) Separating the food into smaller or thinner portions; Pf
(3) Using rapid cooling equipment; Pf
(4) Stirring the food in a container placed in an ice water bath; Pf
(5) Using containers that facilitate heat transfer; Pf
(6) Adding ice as an ingredient; Pf or
(7) Other effective methods. Pf
(B) When placed in cooling or cold holding equipment, food containers in which food is being cooled shall be:
(1) Arranged in the equipment to provide maximum heat transfer through the container walls;Pf and
(2) Loosely covered, or uncovered if protected from overhead contamination as specified under Subparagraph 3-
305.11(A)(2), during the cooling period to facilitate heat transfer from the surface of the food.Pf
(C) For mobile food units: Mobile food units may not cool potentially hazardous foods (TCS) unless they comply with one of
the following conditions:
(1) The food is cooled in a licensed commissary that meets the requirements of OAR 333-150-0000;Pf
(2) Commercial refrigeration equipment is provided on the unit that is capable of cooling foods in accordance with
section 3-501.14;Pf or
(3) Written cooling procedures are prepared in advance by the operator and approved by the regulatory authority prior to
conducting cooling on the unit. The person in charge shall maintain cooling logs and record temperature measurements
to document that food is cooled in accordance with section 3-501.14. The logs must be maintained on the unit for 90
days and be available for inspection upon request.Pf
(4) Units licensed prior to February 1, 2020 must meet this requirement by July 1, 2020.Pf¶
38
3-501.16 Potentially Hazardous Food, Hot and Cold Holding.
(A) Except during preparation, cooking, or cooling, or when time is used as the public health control as specified under §3-
501.19, and except as specified under ¶ (B) and in ¶ (C ) of this section, potentially hazardous food (time/temperature control
for safety food) shall be maintained:
(1) At 57oC (135oF) or above, except that roasts cooked to a temperature and for a time specified in ¶ 3-401.11(B) or
reheated as specified in ¶ 3-403.11(E) may be held at a temperature of 54oC (130oF) or above; P or
(2) At 5ºC (41ºF) or less. P
(B) Eggs that have not been treated to destroy all viable Salmonellae shall be stored in refrigerated equipment that maintains
an ambient air temperature of 7°C (45°F) or less. P
(C) Potentially hazardous food (time/temperature control for safety food) in a homogenous liquid form may be maintained
outside of the temperature control requirements, as specified under ¶ (A) of this section, while contained within specially
designed equipment that complies with the design and construction requirements as specified under ¶ 4-204.13(E).
3-501.17 Ready-to-Eat, Potentially Hazardous Food, Date Marking.
(A) Except when packaging food using a reduced oxygen packaging method as specified under section 3-502.12, and except
as specified in paragraphs (D) and (E) of section 3-501.17, refrigerated, ready-to-eat food (time/temperature control for safety
food) prepared and held in a food establishment for more than 24 hours shall be clearly marked to indicate the date or day by
which the food shall be consumed on premises, sold, or discarded when held at a temperature of 5 degrees Celsius (41
degrees Fahrenheit) or less for a maximum of seven days. The day of preparation shall count as Day 1.Pf
(B) Except as specified in ¶¶ (D) - (F) of this section, refrigerated, ready-to-eat, potentially hazardous food (time/temperature
control for safety food) prepared and packaged by a food processing plant shall be clearly marked, at the time the original
container is opened in a food establishment and if the food is held for more than 24 hours, to indicate the date or day by
which the food shall be consumed on the premises, sold, or discarded, based on the temperature and time combinations
specified in ¶ (A) of this section and: Pf
(1) The day the original container is opened in the food establishment shall be counted as Day 1; Pf and
(2) The day or date marked by the food establishment may not exceed a manufacturer's use-by date if the manufacturer
determined the use-by date based on food safety. Pf
(C) A refrigerated, ready-to-eat, potentially hazardous food (time/temperature control for safety food) ingredient or a portion
of a refrigerated, ready-to-eat, potentially hazardous food (time/temperature control for safety food) that is subsequently
combined with additional ingredients or portions of food shall retain the date marking of the earliest-prepared or first-
prepared ingredient. Pf
(D) A date marking system that meets the criteria stated in ¶¶ (A) and (B) of this section may include:
(1) Using a method approved by the regulatory authority for refrigerated, ready-to-eat potentially hazardous food
(time/temperature control for safety food) that is frequently rewrapped, such as lunchmeat or a roast, or for which date
marking is impractical, such as soft serve mix or milk in a dispensing machine;
(2) Marking the date or day of preparation, with a procedure to discard the food on or before the last date or day by
which the food must be consumed on the premises, sold, or discarded as specified under ¶ (A) of this section;
(3) Marking the date or day the original container is opened in a food establishment, with a procedure to discard the
food on or before the last date or day by which the food must be consumed on the premises, sold, or discarded as
specified under ¶ (B) of this section; or
(4) Using calendar dates, days of the week, color-coded marks, or other effective marking methods, provided that the
marking system is disclosed to the regulatory authority upon request.
(E) Paragraphs (A) and (B) of this section do not apply to individual meal portions served or repackaged for sale from a bulk
container upon a consumer's request.
(F) Paragraph (B) of this section does not apply to the following foods prepared and packaged by a food processing plant
inspected by a regulatory authority:
(1) Deli salads, such as ham salad, seafood salad, chicken salad, egg salad, pasta salad, potato salad, and macaroni
salad, manufactured in accordance with 21 CFR 110 Current good manufacturing practice in manufacturing, packing,
or holding human food;
(2) Hard cheeses containing not more than 39% moisture as defined in 21 CFR 133 Cheeses and related cheese
products, such as cheddar, gruyere, parmesan and reggiano, and romano;
(3) Semi-soft cheeses containing more than 39% moisture, but not more than 50% moisture, as defined in 21 CFR 133
Cheeses and related cheese products, such as blue, edam, gorgonzola, gouda, and monterey jack;
(4) Cultured dairy products as defined in 21 CFR 131 Milk and cream, such as yogurt, sour cream, and buttermilk;
(5) Preserved fish products, such as pickled herring and dried or salted cod, and other acidified fish products defined in
21 CFR 114 Acidified foods;
39
(6) Shelf stable, dry fermented sausages, such as pepperoni and Genoa salami that are not labeled "Keep Refrigerated"
as specified in 9 CFR 317 Labeling, marking devices, and containers, and which retain the original casing on the
product; and
(7) Shelf stable salt-cured products such as prosciutto and Parma (ham) that are not labeled "Keep Refrigerated" as
specified in 9 CFR 317 Labeling, marking devices, and containers.
3-501.18 Ready-to-Eat, Potentially Hazardous Food, Disposition.
(A) A food specified in ¶ 3-501.17(A) or (B) shall be discarded if it:
(1) Exceeds the temperature and time combination specified in ¶ 3-501.17(A), except time that the product is frozen; P
(2) Is in a container or package that does not bear a date or day; P or
(3) Is appropriately marked with a date or day that exceeds a temperature and time combination as specified in ¶ 3-
501.17(A). P
(B) Refrigerated, ready-to-eat, potentially hazardous food (time/temperature control for safety food) prepared in a food
establishment and dispensed through a vending machine with an automatic shutoff control shall be discarded if it exceeds a
temperature and time combination as specified in ¶ 3-501.17(A). P
3-501.19 Time as a Public Health Control.
(A) Except as specified under ¶ (D) of this section, if time without temperature control is used as the public health control for
a working supply of potentially hazardous food (time/temperature control for safety food) before cooking, or for ready-to-eat
potentially hazardous food (time/temperature control for safety food) that is displayed or held for sale or service:
(1) Written procedures shall be prepared in advance, maintained in the food establishment and made available to the
regulatory authority upon request that specify: Pf
(a) Methods of compliance with Subparagraphs (B)(1) -(3) or C)(1)-(5) of this section; Pf and
(b) Methods of compliance with § 3-501.14 for food that is prepared, cooked, and refrigerated before time is used as
a public health control. Pf
(B) If time without temperature control is used as the public health control up to a maximum of 4 hours:
(1) The food shall have an initial temperature of 5ºC (41ºF) or less when removed from cold holding temperature control,
or 57°C (135°F) or greater when removed from hot holding temperature control; P
(2) The food shall be marked or otherwise identified to indicate the time that is 4 hours past the point in time when the
food is removed from temperature control; Pf
(3) The food shall be cooked and served, served at any temperature if ready-to-eat, or discarded, within 4 hours from the
point in time when the food is removed from temperature control; P and
(4) The food in unmarked containers or packages, or marked to exceed a 4-hour limit shall be discarded. P
(C) If time without temperature control is used as the public health control up to a maximum of 6 hours:
(1) The food shall have an initial temperature of 5ºC (41ºF) or less when removed from temperature control and the food
temperature may not exceed 21ºC (70ºF) within a maximum time period of 6 hours; P
(2) The food shall be monitored to ensure the warmest portion of the food does not exceed 21ºC (70ºF) during the 6-hour
period, unless an ambient air temperature is maintained that ensures the food does not exceed 21ºC (70ºF) during the 6-
hour holding period; Pf
(3) The food shall be marked or otherwise identified to indicate: Pf
(a) The time when the food is removed from 5ºC (41ºF) or less cold holding temperature control, Pf and
(b) The time that is 6 hours past the point in time when the food is removed from cold holding temperature
control; Pf
(4) The food shall be:
(a) Discarded if the temperature of the food exceeds 21°C (70°F), P or
(b) Cooked and served, served at any temperature if ready-to-eat, or discarded within a maximum of 6 hours from
the point in time when the food is removed from 5ºC (41ºF) or less cold holding temperature control; P and
(5) The food in unmarked containers or packages, or marked with a time that exceeds the 6-hour limit shall be
discarded. P
(D) A food establishment that serves a highly susceptible population may not use time as specified under ¶¶ (A), (B) or (C) of
this section as the public health control for raw eggs.
3-502.11 Variance Requirement.
A food establishment shall obtain a variance from the regulatory authority as specified in § 8-103.10 and under § 8-103.11
before: Pf
(A) Smoking food as a method of food preservation rather than as a method of flavor enhancement; Pf
(B) Curing food; Pf
40
(C) Using food additives or adding components such as vinegar: Pf
(1) As a method of food preservation rather than as a method of flavor enhancement, Pf or
(2) To render a food so that it is not potentially hazardous (time/temperature control of safety food); Pf
(D) Packaging food using a reduced oxygen packaging method except where the growth of and toxin formation by
Clostridium botulinum and the growth of Listeria monocytogenes are controlled as specified under § 3-502.12; Pf
(E) Operating a molluscan shellfish life-support system display tank used to store or display shellfish that are offered for
human consumption;Pf
(F) Custom processing animals that are for personal use as food and not for sale or service in a food establishment; Pf
(G) Preparing food by another method that is determined by the regulatory authority to require a variance; Pf or
(H) Sprouting seeds or beans. Pf
(I) Except as allowed under OAR 333-162-0030(3), mobile food units may not conduct activities that require a variance
unless those activities occur in a licensed restaurant or commissary that meets the applicable requirements of OAR 333-150-
0000.Pf
3-502.12 Reduced Oxygen Packaging, Criteria.
(A) Except for a food establishment that obtains a variance as specified under § 3-502.11, a food establishment that packages
potentially hazardous food (time/temperature control for safety food) using a reduced oxygen packaging method shall control
the growth and toxin formation of Clostridium botulinum and the growth of Listeria monocytogenes. P
(B) A food establishment that packages potentially hazardous food (time/temperature control for safety food) using a reduced
oxygen packaging method shall have a HACCP plan that contains the information specified under ¶ 8-201.14(D) and that: Pf
(1) Identifies the food to be packaged; Pf
(2) Except as specified under ¶¶ (C) - (E) of this section, requires that the packaged food shall be maintained at 5°C
(41°F) or less and meet at least one of the following criteria: Pf
(a) Has an a of 0.91 or less, Pf
w
(b) Has a pH of 4.6 or less, Pf
(c) Is a meat or poultry product cured at a food processing plant regulated by the USDA using substances specified
in 9 CFR 424.21, Use of food ingredients and sources of radiation, and is received in an intact package, Pf or
(d) Is a food with a high level of competing organisms such as raw meat, raw poultry, or raw vegetables; Pf
(3) Describes how the package shall be prominently and conspicuously labeled on the principal display panel in bold
type on a contrasting background, with instructions to: Pf
(a) Maintain the food at 5oC (41oF) or below, Pf and
(b) Discard the food if within 14 calendar days of its packaging it is not served for on-premises consumption, or
consumed if served or sold for off-premises consumption; Pf
(4) Limits the refrigerated shelf life to no more than 14 calendar days from packaging to consumption, except the time
the product is maintained frozen, or the original manufacturer's "sell by" or "use by" date, whichever occurs first; P
(5) Includes operational procedures that:
(a) Minimize contacting ready-to-eat food with bare hands as specified under ¶ 3-301.11(B), Pf
(b) Identify a designated work area and the method by which: Pf
(i) Physical barriers or methods of separation of raw foods and ready-to-eat foods minimize cross
contamination, Pf and
(ii) Access to the processing equipment is limited to responsible trained personnel familiar with the potential
hazards of the operation, Pf and
(c) Delineate cleaning and sanitization procedures for food-contact surfaces; Pf and
(6) Describes the training program that ensures that the individual responsible for the reduced oxygen packaging
operation understands the: Pf
(a) Concepts required for a safe operation, Pf
(b) Equipment and facilities, Pf and
(c) Procedures specified under Subparagraph (B)(5) of this section and ¶ 8-201.14(D). Pf
(C) Except for fish that is frozen before, during, and after packaging, a food establishment may not package fish using a
reduced oxygen packaging method. P
(D) Except as specified under ¶ (C) of this section, a food establishment that packages food using a cook-chill or sous vide
process shall:
(1) Implement a HACCP plan that contains the information as specified under ¶ 8-201.14(D); Pf
(2) Ensure the food is:
(a) Prepared and consumed on the premises, or prepared and consumed off the premises but within the same
business entity with no distribution or sale of the packaged product to another business entity or the consumer, Pf
(b) Cooked to heat all parts of the food to a temperature and for a time as specified under § 3-401.11, P
(c) Protected from contamination before and after cooking as specified under Parts 3-3 and 3-4, P
41
(d) Placed in a package with an oxygen barrier and sealed before cooking, or placed in a package and sealed
immediately after cooking and before reaching a temperature below 57°C (135°F), P
(e) Cooled to 5°C (41°F) in the sealed package or bag as specified under § 3-501.14 and subsequently: P
(i) Cooled to 1°C (34°F) within 48 hours of reaching 5°C (41°F) and held at that temperature until consumed
or discarded within 30 days after the date of packaging;P
(ii) Cooled to 1°C (34°F) within 48 hours of reaching 5°C (41°F), removed from refrigeration equipment that
maintains a 1°C (34°F) food temperature and then held at 5°C (41°F) or less for no more than 72 hours, at
which time the food must be consumed or discarded; P
(iii) Cooled to 3°C (38°F) or less within 24 hours of reaching 5°C (41°F) and held there for no more than 72
hours from packaging, at which time the food must be consumed or discarded; P or
(iv) Held frozen with no shelf life restriction while frozen until consumed or used. P
(f) Held in a refrigeration unit that is equipped with an electronic system that continuously monitors time and
temperature and is visually examined for proper operation twice daily, Pf
(g) If transported off-site to a satellite location of the same business entity, equipped with verifiable electronic
monitoring devices to ensure that times and temperatures are monitored during transportation, Pf and
(h) Labeled with the product name and the date packaged;Pf and
(3) Maintain the records required to confirm that cooling and cold holding refrigeration time/temperature parameters are
required as part of the HACCP plan and:
(a) Make such records available to the regulatory authority upon request, Pf and
(b) Hold such records for at least 6 months; Pf and
(4) Implement written operational procedures as specified under Subparagraph (B)(5) of this section and a training
program as specified under Subparagraph (B)(6) of this section.Pf
(E) A food establishment that packages cheese using a reduced oxygen packaging method shall:
(1) Limit the cheeses packaged to those that are commercially manufactured in a food processing plant with no
ingredients added in the food establishment and that meet the Standards of Identity as specified in 21 CFR 133.150 Hard
cheeses, 21 CFR 133.169 Pasteurized process cheese or 21 CFR 133.187 Semisoft cheeses; P
(2) Have a HACCP plan that contains the information specified under ¶ 8-201.14(D) and as specified under ¶¶ (B)(1),
(B)(3)(a), (B)(5) and (B)(6) of this section; Pf
(3) Labels the package on the principal display panel with a "use by" date that does not exceed 30 days from its
packaging or the original manufacturer's "sell by" or "use by" date, whichever occurs first; Pf and
(4) Discards the reduced oxygen packaged cheese if it is not sold for off-premises consumption or consumed within 30
calendar days of its packaging. Pf
3-6 FOOD IDENTITY, PRESENTATION, AND ON-PREMISES LABELING
Subparts 3-601 Accurate Representation
3-602 Labeling
3-603 Consumer Advisory
3-601.11 Standards of Identity.
Packaged food shall comply with standard of identity requirements in 21 CFR 131-169 and 9 CFR 319 Definitions and
Standards of Identity or Composition, and the general requirements in 21 CFR 130 - Food Standards: General and 9 CFR
319 Subpart A - General.
3-601.12 Honestly Presented.
(A) Food shall be offered for human consumption in a way that does not mislead or misinform the consumer.
(B) Food or color additives, colored overwraps, or lights may not be used to misrepresent the true appearance, color, or
quality of a food.
3-602.11 Food Labels.
(A) Food packaged in a food establishment, shall be labeled as specified in law, including 21 CFR 101 - Food labeling, and
9 CFR 317 Labeling, marking devices, and containers.
(B) Label information shall include:
(1) The common name of the food, or absent a common name, an adequately descriptive identity statement;
(2) If made from two or more ingredients, a list of ingredients in descending order of predominance by weight, including
a declaration of artificial color or flavor and chemical preservatives, if contained in the food;
42
(3) An accurate declaration of the quantity of contents;
(4) The name and place of business of the manufacturer, packer, or distributor; and
(5) The name of the food source for each major food allergen contained in the food unless the food source is already part
of the common or usual name of the respective ingredient (Effective January 1, 2006). Pf
(6) Except as exempted in the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act § 403(Q)(3) - (5), nutrition labeling as specified in
21 CFR 101 - Food Labeling and 9 CFR 317 Subpart B Nutrition Labeling.
(7) For any salmonid fish containing canthaxanthin as a color additive, the labeling of the bulk fish container, including a
list of ingredients, displayed on the retail container or by other written means, such as a counter card, that discloses the
use of canthaxanthin.
(C) Bulk food that is available for consumer self-dispensing shall be prominently labeled with the following information in
plain view of the consumer:
(1) The manufacturer's or processor's label that was provided with the food; or
(2) A card, sign, or other method of notification that includes the information specified under Subparagraphs (B)(1), (2),
and (5) of this section.
(D) Bulk, unpackaged foods such as bakery products and unpackaged foods that are portioned to consumer specification
need not be labeled if:
(1) A health, nutrient content, or other claim is not made;
(2) There are no state or local laws requiring labeling; and
(3) The food is manufactured or prepared on the premises of the food establishment or at another food establishment or
a food processing plant that is owned by the same person and is regulated by the food regulatory agency that has
jurisdiction.
3-602.12 Other Forms of Information.
(A) If required by law, consumer warnings shall be provided.
(B) Food establishment or manufacturers' dating information on foods may not be concealed or altered.
3-603.11 Consumption of Animal Foods that are Raw, Undercooked, or Not Otherwise
Processed to Eliminate Pathogens.
(A) Except as specified in ¶ 3-401.11(C) and Subparagraph 3-401.11(D)(4) and under ¶ 3-801.11(C), if an animal food such
as beef, eggs, fish, lamb, milk, pork, poultry, or shellfish is served or sold raw, undercooked, or without otherwise being
processed to eliminate pathogens, either in ready-to-eat form or as an ingredient in another ready-to-eat food, the permit
holder shall inform consumers of the significantly increased risk of consuming such foods by way of a disclosure and
reminder, as specified in ¶¶ (B) and (C) of this section using brochures, deli case or menu advisories, label statements, table
tents, placards, or other effective written means. Pf
(B) Disclosure shall include:
(1) A description of the animal-derived foods, such as "oysters on the half shell (raw oysters)," "raw-egg Caesar salad,"
and "hamburgers (can be cooked to order)"; Pf or
(2) Identification of the animal-derived foods by asterisking them to a footnote that states that the items are served raw or
undercooked, or contain (or may contain) raw or undercooked ingredients. Pf
(3) Food service establishments that serve predominantly raw foods may disclose those items that are not served raw or
do not require cooking before consumption.Pf
(C) Reminder shall include asterisking the animal-derived foods requiring disclosure to a footnote that states:
(1) Regarding the safety of these items, written information is available upon request; Pf
(2) Consuming raw or undercooked meats, poultry, seafood, shellfish, or eggs may increase your risk of foodborne
illness; Pf or
(3) Consuming raw or undercooked meats, poultry, seafood, shellfish, or eggs may increase your risk of foodborne
illness, especially if you have certain medical conditions. Pf
3-7 CONTAMINATED FOOD
Subpart 3-701 Disposition
3-701.11 Discarding or Reconditioning Unsafe, Adulterated, or Contaminated Food.
(A) A food that is unsafe, adulterated, or not honestly presented as specified under § 3-101.11 shall be discarded or
reconditioned according to an approved procedure. P
(B) Food that is not from an approved source as specified under §§ 3-201.11 - .17 shall be discarded. P
(C) Ready-to-eat food that may have been contaminated by an employee who has been restricted or excluded as specified
under § 2-201.12 shall be discarded. P
43
(D) Food that is contaminated by food employees, consumers, or other persons through contact with their hands, bodily
discharges, such as nasal or oral discharges, or other means shall be discarded. P
(E) Potentially hazardous foods (TCS) that have been kept at temperatures above 41 degrees Fahrenheit or below 135 degrees
Fahrenheit for more than four hours shall be discarded.P
3-8 SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS FOR HIGHLY SUSCEPTIBLE POPULATIONS
Subpart 3-801 Additional Safeguards
3-801.11 Pasteurized Foods, Prohibited Reservice, and Prohibited Food.
In a food establishment that serves a highly susceptible population:
(A) The following criteria apply to juice:
(1) For the purposes of this paragraph only, children who are age 9 or less and receive food in a school, day care setting,
or similar facility that provides custodial care are included as highly susceptible populations;
(2) Prepackaged juice or a prepackaged beverage containing juice, that bears a warning label as specified in 21 CFR,
101.17(g) Food labeling, warning, notice, and safe handling statements, Juices that have not been specifically processed
to prevent, reduce, or eliminate the presence of pathogens, or a packaged juice or beverage containing juice, that bears a
warning label as specified under ¶ 3-404.11(B) may not be served or offered for sale; P and
(3) Unpackaged juice that is prepared on the premises for service or sale in a ready-to-eat form shall be processed under
a HACCP plan that contains the information specified under ¶¶ 8-201.14(B) - (E) and as specified in 21 CFR Part 120 –
Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Point (HACCP) Systems, Subpart B Pathogen Reduction, 120.24 Process
controls. P
(B) Pasteurized eggs or egg products shall be substituted for raw eggs in the preparation of: P
(1) Foods such as Caesar salad, hollandaise or Béarnaise sauce, mayonnaise, meringue, eggnog, ice cream, and egg-
fortified beverages, P and
(2) Except as specified in ¶ (F) of this section, recipes in which more than one egg is broken and the eggs are
combined; P
(C) The following foods may not be served or offered for sale in a ready-to-eat form: P
(1) Raw animal foods such as raw fish, raw-marinated fish, raw molluscan shellfish, and steak tartare, P
(2) A partially cooked animal food such as lightly cooked fish, rare meat, soft-cooked eggs that are made from raw eggs,
and meringue; P and
(3) Raw seed sprouts. P
(D) Food employees may not contact ready-to-eat food as specified under ¶¶ 3-301.11(B). P
(E) Time only, as the public health control as specified under ¶ 3-501.19(D), may not be used for raw eggs. P
(F) Subparagraph (B)(2) of this section does not apply if:
(1) The raw eggs are combined immediately before cooking for one consumer's serving at a single meal, cooked as
specified under Subparagraph 3-401.11(A)(1), and served immediately, such as an omelet, soufflé, or scrambled eggs;
(2) The raw eggs are combined as an ingredient immediately before baking and the eggs are thoroughly cooked to a
ready-to-eat form, such as a cake, muffin, or bread; or
(3) The preparation of the food is conducted under a HACCP plan that:
(a) Identifies the food to be prepared,
(b) Prohibits contacting ready-to-eat food with bare hands,
(c) Includes specifications and practices that ensure:
(i) Salmonella Enteritidis growth is controlled before and after cooking, and
(ii) Salmonella Enteritidis is destroyed by cooking the eggs according to the temperature and time specified in
Subparagraph 3-401.11(A)(2),
(d) Contains the information specified under ¶ 8-201.14(D) including procedures that:
(i) Control cross contamination of ready-to-eat food with raw eggs, and
(ii) Delineate cleaning and sanitization procedures for food-contact surfaces, and
(e) Describes the training program that ensures that the food employee responsible for the preparation of the food
understands the procedures to be used.
(G) Except as specified in paragraph (H) of this section, food may be re-served as specified under Subparagraph 3-
306.14(B)(1) and (2).
(H) Food may not be re-served under the following conditions:
(1) Any food served to patients or clients who are under contact precautions in medical isolation or quarantine, or
protective environment isolation may not be re-served to others outside.
(2) Packages of food from any patients, clients, or other consumers should not be re-served to persons in protective
environment isolation.
44
Chapter 4
Equipment, Utensils, and Linens
Parts
4-1 MATERIALS FOR CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR
4-2 DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION
4-3 NUMBERS AND CAPACITIES
4-4 LOCATION AND INSTALLATION
4-5 MAINTENANCE AND OPERATION
4-6 CLEANING OF EQUIPMENT AND UTENSILS
4-7 SANITIZATION OF EQUIPMENT AND UTENSILS
4-8 LAUNDERING
4-9 PROTECTION OF CLEAN ITEMS
4-1 MATERIALS FOR CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR
Subparts 4-101 Multiuse
4-102 Single-Service and Single-Use
4-101.11 Characteristics.
Materials that are used in the construction of utensils and food-contact surfaces of equipment may not allow the migration of
deleterious substances or impart colors, odors, or tastes to food and under normal use conditions shall be: P
(A) Safe;P
(B) Durable, corrosion-resistant, and nonabsorbent;
(C) Sufficient in weight and thickness to withstand repeated warewashing;
(D) Finished to have a smooth, easily cleanable surface; and
(E) Resistant to pitting, chipping, crazing, scratching, scoring, distortion, and decomposition.
4-101.12 Cast Iron, Use Limitation.
(A) Except as specified in ¶¶ (B) and (C) of this section, cast iron may not be used for utensils or food-contact surfaces of
equipment.
(B) Cast iron may be used as a surface for cooking.
(C) Cast iron may be used in utensils for serving food if the utensils are used only as part of an uninterrupted process from
cooking through service.
4-101.13 Lead, Use Limitation.
(A) Ceramic, china, and crystal utensils, and decorative utensils such as hand painted ceramic or china that are used in
contact with food shall be lead-free or contain levels of lead not exceeding the limits of the following utensil categories: P
Utensil Category Ceramic Article Description Maximum Lead mg/L
Beverage Mugs, Cups, Pitchers Coffee Mugs 0.5
Large Hollowware (excluding pitchers) Bowls ≥ 1.1 Liter 1
(1.16 Quart)
Small Hollowware (excluding cups & mugs) Bowls < 1.1 Liter 2.0
(1.16 Quart)
Flat Tableware Plates, Saucers 3.0
(B) Pewter alloys containing lead in excess of 0.05% may not be used as a food-contact surface. P
(C) Solder and flux containing lead in excess of 0.2% may not be used as a food-contact surface.
45
4-101.14 Copper, Use Limitation.
(A) Except as specified in ¶ (B) of this section, copper and copper alloys such as brass may not be used in contact with a food
that has a pH below 6 such as vinegar, fruit juice, or wine or for a fitting or tubing installed between a backflow prevention
device and a carbonator.P
(B) Copper and copper alloys may be used in contact with beer brewing ingredients that have a pH below 6 in the
prefermentation and fermentation steps of a beer brewing operation such as a brewpub or microbrewery.
4-101.15 Galvanized Metal, Use Limitation.
Galvanized metal may not be used for utensils or food-contact surfaces of equipment that are used in contact with acidic
food.P
4-101.16 Sponges, Use Limitation.
Sponges may not be used in contact with cleaned and sanitized or in-use food-contact surfaces.
4-101.17 Wood, Use Limitation.
(A) Except as specified in ¶¶ (B), (C), (D) and (E) of this section, wood and wood wicker may not be used as a food-contact
surface.
(B) Hard maple or an equivalently hard, close-grained wood may be used for:
(1) Cutting boards; cutting blocks; bakers' tables; and utensils such as rolling pins, doughnut dowels, salad bowls, and
chopsticks; and
(2) Wooden paddles used in confectionery operations for pressure scraping kettles when manually preparing confections
at a temperature of 110°C (230°F) or above.
(C) Whole, uncut, raw fruits and vegetables, and nuts in the shell may be kept in the wood shipping containers in which they
were received, until the fruits, vegetables, or nuts are used.
(D) If the nature of the food requires removal of rinds, peels, husks, or shells before consumption, the whole, uncut, raw food
may be kept in:
(1) Untreated wood containers; or
(2) Treated wood containers if the containers are treated with a preservative that meets the requirements specified in 21
CFR 178.3800 Preservatives for wood.
(E) Untreated wood planks, such as cedar, may be used as a cooking surface for grilling or baking.
4-101.18 Nonstick Coatings, Use Limitation.
Multiuse kitchenware such as frying pans, griddles, sauce pans, cookie sheets, and waffle bakers that have a perfluorocarbon
resin coating shall be used with nonscoring or nonscratching utensils and cleaning aids.
4-101.19 Nonfood-Contact Surfaces.
Nonfood-contact surfaces of equipment that are exposed to splash, spillage, or other food soiling or that require frequent
cleaning shall be constructed of a corrosion-resistant, nonabsorbent, and smooth material.
4-102.11 Characteristics.
Materials that are used to make single-service and single-use articles:
(A) May not:
(1) Allow the migration of deleterious substances,P or
(2) Impart colors, odors, or tastes to food; and
(B) Shall be:
(1) Safe,P and
(2) Clean.
4.2 DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION
Subparts 4-201 Durability and Strength
4-202 Cleanability
4-203 Accuracy
4-204 Functionality
4-205 Acceptability
46
4-201.11 Equipment and Utensils.
Equipment and utensils shall be designed and constructed to be durable and to retain their characteristic qualities under
normal use conditions.
4-201.12 Food Temperature Measuring Devices.
Food temperature measuring devices may not have sensors or stems constructed of glass, except that thermometers with glass
sensors or stems that are encased in a shatterproof coating such as candy thermometers may be used.P
4-202.11 Food-Contact Surfaces.
(A) Multiuse food-contact surfaces shall be:
(1) Smooth; Pf
(2) Free of breaks, open seams, cracks, chips, inclusions, pits, and similar imperfections; Pf
(3) Free of sharp internal angles, corners, and crevices; Pf
(4) Finished to have smooth welds and joints; Pf and
(5) Except as specified in ¶ (B) of this section, accessible for cleaning and inspection by one of the following methods:
(a) Without being disassembled, Pf
(b) By disassembling without the use of tools, Pf or
(c) By easy disassembling with the use of handheld tools commonly available to maintenance and cleaning
personnel such as screwdrivers, pliers, open-end wrenches, and Allen wrenches. Pf
(B) Subparagraph (A)(5) of this section does not apply to cooking oil storage tanks, distribution lines for cooking oils, or
beverage syrup lines or tubes.
4-202.12 CIP Equipment.
(A) CIP equipment shall meet the characteristics specified under § 4-202.11 and shall be designed and constructed so that:
(1) Cleaning and sanitizing solutions circulate throughout a fixed system and contact all interior food-contact surfaces,Pf
and
(2) The system is self-draining or capable of being completely drained of cleaning and sanitizing solutions; and
(B) CIP equipment that is not designed to be disassembled for cleaning shall be designed with inspection access points to
ensure that all interior food-contact surfaces throughout the fixed system are being effectively cleaned.
4-202.13 "V" Threads, Use Limitation.
Except for hot oil cooking or filtering equipment, "V" type threads may not be used on food-contact surfaces.
4-202.14 Hot Oil Filtering Equipment.
Hot oil filtering equipment shall meet the characteristics specified under §§ 4-202.11 or 4-202.12 and shall be readily
accessible for filter replacement and cleaning of the filter.
4-202.15 Can Openers.
Cutting or piercing parts of can openers shall be readily removable for cleaning and for replacement.
4-202.16 Nonfood-Contact Surfaces.
Nonfood-contact surfaces shall be free of unnecessary ledges, projections, and crevices, and designed and constructed to
allow easy cleaning and to facilitate maintenance.
4-202.17 Kick Plates, Removable.
Kick plates shall be designed so that the areas behind them are accessible for inspection and cleaning by being:
(A) Removable by one of the methods specified under Subparagraph 4-202.11(A)(5) or capable of being rotated open; and
(B) Removable or capable of being rotated open without unlocking equipment doors.
4-202.18 Ventilation Hood Systems, Filters.
Filters or other grease extracting equipment shall be designed to be readily removable for cleaning and replacement if not
designed to be cleaned in place.
47
4-203.11 Temperature Measuring Devices, Food.
(A) Food temperature measuring devices that are scaled only in Celsius or dually scaled in Celsius and Fahrenheit shall be
accurate to ±1oC in the intended range of use. Pf
(B) Food temperature measuring devices that are scaled only in Fahrenheit shall be accurate to ±2oF in the intended range
of use. Pf
4-203.12 Temperature Measuring Devices, Ambient Air and Water.
(A) Ambient air and water temperature measuring devices that are scaled in Celsius or dually scaled in Celsius and
Fahrenheit shall be designed to be easily readable and accurate to ±1.5oC in the intended range of use.Pf
(B) Ambient air and water temperature measuring devices that are scaled only in Fahrenheit shall be accurate to ±3oF in the
intended range of use.Pf
4-203.13 Pressure Measuring Devices, Mechanical Warewashing Equipment.
Pressure measuring devices that display the pressures in the water supply line for the fresh hot water sanitizing rinse shall
have increments of 7 kilopascals (1 pound per square inch) or smaller and shall be accurate to ±14 kilopascals(±2 pounds per
square inch) in the range indicated on the manufacturer's data plate.
4-204.11 Ventilation Hood Systems, Drip Prevention.
Exhaust ventilation hood systems in food preparation and warewashing areas including components such as hoods, fans,
guards, and ducting shall be designed to prevent grease or condensation from draining or dripping onto food, equipment,
utensils, linens, and single-service and single-use articles.
4-204.12 Equipment Openings, Closures and Deflectors.
(A) A cover or lid for equipment shall overlap the opening and be sloped to drain.
(B) An opening located within the top of a unit of equipment that is designed for use with a cover or lid shall be flanged
upward at least 5 millimeters (two-tenths of an inch).
(C) Except as specified under ¶ (D) of this section, fixed piping, temperature measuring devices, rotary shafts, and other parts
extending into equipment shall be provided with a watertight joint at the point where the item enters the equipment.
(D) If a watertight joint is not provided:
(1) The piping, temperature measuring devices, rotary shafts, and other parts extending through the openings shall be
equipped with an apron designed to deflect condensation, drips, and dust from openings into the food; and
(2) The opening shall be flanged as specified under ¶ (B) of this section.
4-204.13 Dispensing Equipment, Protection of Equipment and Food.
In equipment that dispenses or vends liquid food or ice in unpackaged form:
(A) The delivery tube, chute, orifice, and splash surfaces directly above the container receiving the food shall be designed in
a manner, such as with barriers, baffles, or drip aprons, so that drips from condensation and splash are diverted from the
opening of the container receiving the food;
(B) The delivery tube, chute, and orifice shall be protected from manual contact such as by being recessed;
(C) The delivery tube or chute and orifice of equipment used to vend liquid food or ice in unpackaged form to self-service
consumers shall be designed so that the delivery tube or chute and orifice are protected from dust, insects, rodents, and other
contamination by a self-closing door if the equipment is:
(1) Located in an outside area that does not otherwise afford the protection of an enclosure against the rain, windblown
debris, insects, rodents, and other contaminants that are present in the environment, or
(2) Available for self-service during hours when it is not under the full-time supervision of a food employee; and
(D) The dispensing equipment actuating lever or mechanism and filling device of consumer self-service beverage dispensing
equipment shall be designed to prevent contact with the lip-contact surface of glasses or cups that are refilled.
(E) Dispensing equipment in which potentially hazardous food (time/temperature control for safety food) in a homogenous
liquid form is maintained outside of the temperature control requirements as specified under ¶ 3-501.16(A) shall:
(1) Be specifically designed and equipped to maintain the commercial sterility of aseptically packaged food in a
homogenous liquid form for a specified duration from the time of opening the packaging within the equipment;P and
(2) Conform to the requirements for this equipment as specified in NSF/ANSI 18-2006- Manual Food and Beverage
Dispensing equipment. P
48
4-204.14 Vending Machine, Vending Stage Closure.
The dispensing compartment of a vending machine including a machine that is designed to vend prepackaged snack food that
is not potentially hazardous (time/temperature control for safety food) shall be equipped with a self-closing door or cover if
the machine is:
(A) Located in an outside area that does not otherwise afford the protection of an enclosure against the rain, windblown
debris, insects, rodents, and other contaminants that are present in the environment; or
(B) Available for self-service during hours when it is not under the full-time supervision of a food employee.
4-204.15 Bearings and Gear Boxes, Leakproof.
Equipment containing bearings and gears that require lubricants shall be designed and constructed so that the lubricant cannot
leak, drip, or be forced into food or onto food-contact surfaces.
4-204.16 Beverage Tubing, Separation.
Except for cold plates that are constructed integrally with an ice storage bin, beverage tubing and cold-plate beverage cooling
devices may not be installed in contact with stored ice.
4-204.17 Ice Units, Separation of Drains.
Liquid waste drain lines may not pass through an ice machine or ice storage bin.
4-204.18 Condenser Unit, Separation.
If a condenser unit is an integral component of equipment, the condenser unit shall be separated from the food and food
storage space by a dustproof barrier.
4-204.19 Can Openers on Vending Machines.
Cutting or piercing parts of can openers on vending machines shall be protected from manual contact, dust, insects, rodents,
and other contamination.
4-204.110 Molluscan Shellfish Tanks.
(A) Except as specified under ¶ (B) of this section, molluscan shellfish life support system display tanks may not be used to
store or display shellfish that are offered for human consumption and shall be conspicuously marked so that it is obvious to
the consumer that the shellfish are for display only. P
(B) Molluscan shellfish life-support system display tanks that are used to store or display shellfish that are offered for human
consumption shall be operated and maintained in accordance with a variance granted by the regulatory authority as specified
in § 8-103.10 and a HACCP plan that: Pf
(1) Is submitted by the permit holder and approved as specified under § 8-103.11;Pf and
(2) Ensures that:
(a) Water used with fish other than molluscan shellfish does not flow into the molluscan tank, Pf
(b) The safety and quality of the shellfish as they were received are not compromised by the use of the tank, Pf and
(c) The identity of the source of the shellstock is retained as specified under § 3-203.12. Pf
4-204.111 Vending Machines, Automatic Shutoff.
(A) A machine vending potentially hazardous food (time/temperature control for safety food) shall have an automatic control
that prevents the machine from vending food:
(1) If there is a power failure, mechanical failure, or other condition that results in an internal machine temperature that
cannot maintain food temperatures as specified under Chapter 3; P and
(2) If a condition specified under Subparagraph (A)(1) of this section occurs, until the machine is serviced and restocked
with food that has been maintained at temperatures specified under Chapter 3. P
(B) When the automatic shutoff within a machine vending potentially hazardous food (time/temperature control for safety
food) is activated:
(1) In a refrigerated vending machine, the ambient air temperature may not exceed 5°C (41°F) for more than 30 minutes
immediately after the machine is filled, serviced, or restocked;P or
(2) In a hot holding vending machine, the ambient air temperature may not be less than 57°C (135°F) for more than 120
minutes immediately after the machine is filled, serviced, or restocked. P
49
4-204.112 Temperature Measuring Devices.
(A) In a mechanically refrigerated or hot food storage unit, the sensor of a temperature measuring device shall be located to
measure the air temperature or a simulated product temperature in the warmest part of a mechanically refrigerated unit and in
the coolest part of a hot food storage unit.
(B) Except as specified in ¶ (C) of this section, cold or hot holding equipment used for potentially hazardous food
(time/temperature control for safety food) shall be designed to include and shall be equipped with at least one integral or
permanently affixed temperature measuring device that is located to allow easy viewing of the device's temperature display.
(C) Paragraph (B) of this section does not apply to equipment for which the placement of a temperature measuring device is
not a practical means for measuring the ambient air surrounding the food because of the design, type, and use of the
equipment, such as calrod units, heat lamps, cold plates, bain-maries, steam tables, insulated food transport containers, and
salad bars.
(D) Temperature measuring devices shall be designed to be easily readable.
(E) Food temperature measuring devices and water temperature measuring devices on warewashing machines shall have a
numerical scale, printed record, or digital readout in increments no greater than 1°C or 2°F in the intended range of use.Pf
4-204.113 Warewashing Machine, Data Plate Operating Specifications.
A warewashing machine shall be provided with an easily accessible and readable data plate affixed to the machine by the
manufacturer that indicates the machine's design and operating specifications including the:
(A) Temperatures required for washing, rinsing, and sanitizing;
(B) Pressure required for the fresh water sanitizing rinse unless the machine is designed to use only a pumped sanitizing
rinse; and
(C) Conveyor speed for conveyor machines or cycle time for stationary rack machines.
4-204.114 Warewashing Machines, Internal Baffles.
Warewashing machine wash and rinse tanks shall be equipped with baffles, curtains, or other means to minimize internal
cross contamination of the solutions in wash and rinse tanks.
4-204.115 Warewashing Machines, Temperature Measuring Devices.
A warewashing machine shall be equipped with a temperature-measuring device that indicates the temperature of the water:
(A) In each wash and rinse tank;Pf and
(B) As the water enters the hot water sanitizing final rinse manifold or in the chemical sanitizing solution tank. Pf
4-204.116 Manual Warewashing Equipment, Heaters and Baskets.
If hot water is used for sanitization in manual warewashing operations, the sanitizing compartment of the sink shall be:
(A) Designed with an integral heating device that is capable of maintaining water at a temperature not less than 77oC
(171oF);Pf and
(B) Provided with a rack or basket to allow complete immersion of equipment and utensils into the hot water.Pf
4-204.117 Warewashing Machines, Sanitizer Level Indicator.
A warewashing machine that is installed after adoption of this Code by the regulatory authority, shall be equipped to:
(A) Automatically dispense detergents and sanitizers; Pf and
(B) Incorporate a visual means to verify that detergents and sanitizers are delivered or a visual or audible alarm to signal if
the detergents and sanitizers are not delivered to the respective washing and sanitizing cycles. Pf
4-204.118 Warewashing Machines, Flow Pressure Device.
(A) Warewashing machines that provide a fresh hot water sanitizing rinse shall be equipped with a pressure gauge or similar
device such as a transducer that measures and displays the water pressure in the supply line immediately before entering the
warewashing machine; and
(B) If the flow pressure measuring device is upstream of the fresh hot water sanitizing rinse control valve, the device shall be
mounted in a 6.4 millimeter or one-fourth inch Iron Pipe Size (IPS) valve.
(C) Paragraphs (A) and (B) of this section do not apply to a machine that uses only a pumped or recirculated sanitizing rinse.
4-204.119 Warewashing Sinks and Drainboards, Self-Draining.
Sinks and drainboards of warewashing sinks and machines shall be self-draining.
50
4-204.120 Equipment Compartments, Drainage.
Equipment compartments that are subject to accumulation of moisture due to conditions such as condensation, food or
beverage drip, or water from melting ice shall be sloped to an outlet that allows complete draining.
4-204.121 Vending Machines, Liquid Waste Products.
(A) Vending machines designed to store beverages that are packaged in containers made from paper products shall be
equipped with diversion devices and retention pans or drains for container leakage.
(B) Vending machines that dispense liquid food in bulk shall be:
(1) Provided with an internally mounted waste receptacle for the collection of drip, spillage, overflow, or other internal
wastes; and
(2) Equipped with an automatic shutoff device that will place the machine out of operation before the waste receptacle
overflows.
(C) Shutoff devices specified under Subparagraph (B)(2) of this section shall prevent water or liquid food from continuously
running if there is a failure of a flow control device in the water or liquid food system or waste accumulation that could lead
to overflow of the waste receptacle.
4-204.122 Case Lot Handling Apparatuses, Moveability.
Apparatuses, such as dollies, pallets, racks, and skids used to store and transport large quantities of packaged foods received
from a supplier in a cased or overwrapped lot, shall be designed to be moved by hand or by conveniently available equipment
such as hand trucks and forklifts.
4-204.123 Vending Machine Doors and Openings.
(A) Vending machine doors and access opening covers to food and container storage spaces shall be tight-fitting so that the
space along the entire interface between the doors or covers and the cabinet of the machine, if the doors or covers are in a
closed position, is no greater than 1.5 millimeters or one-sixteenth inch by:
(1) Being covered with louvers, screens, or materials that provide an equivalent opening of not greater than 1.5
millimeters or one-sixteenth inch. Screening of 12 or more mesh to 2.5 centimeters (12 mesh to 1 inch) meets this
requirement;
(2) Being effectively gasketed;
(3) Having interface surfaces that are at least 13 millimeters or one-half inch wide; or
(4) Jambs or surfaces used to form an L-shaped entry path to the interface.
(B) Vending machine service connection openings through an exterior wall of a machine shall be closed by sealants, clamps,
or grommets so that the openings are no larger than 1.5 millimeters or one-sixteenth inch.
4-205.10 Food Equipment, Certification and Classification.
Food equipment that is certified or classified for sanitation by an American National Standards Institute (ANSI)-accredited
certification program will be deemed to comply with Parts 4-1 and 4-2 of this chapter.
4-3 NUMBERS AND CAPACITIES
Subparts 4-301 Equipment
4-302 Utensils, Temperature Measuring and Testing Devices
4-301.11 Cooling, Heating, and Holding Capacities.
Equipment for cooling and heating food, and holding cold and hot food, shall be sufficient in number and capacity to provide
food temperatures as specified under Chapter 3.Pf
4-301.12 Manual Warewashing, Sink Compartment Requirements.
(A) Except as specified in ¶¶ (C) and (F) of this section, a sink with at least 3 compartments shall be provided for manually
washing, rinsing, and sanitizing equipment and utensils.
(B) Sink compartments shall be large enough to accommodate immersion of the largest equipment and utensils. If equipment
or utensils are too large for the warewashing sink, a warewashing machine or alternative equipment as specified in ¶ (C) of
this section shall be used.
51
(C) Alternative manual warewashing equipment may be used when there are special cleaning needs or constraints and its use
is approved. Alternative manual warewashing equipment may include:
(1) High-pressure detergent sprayers;
(2) Low- or line-pressure spray detergent foamers;
(3) Other task-specific cleaning equipment;
(4) Brushes or other implements; or
(5) [Deleted]
(6) Receptacles that substitute for the compartments of a multicompartment sink.
(D) [Deleted]
(E) [Deleted]
(F) A commercial warewashing machine is allowed in lieu of a manual warewashing sink as required in this section.
(G) For mobile food units:
(1) Class I, II and III mobile food units are not required to provide warewashing facilities on the unit, if adequate
facilities exist at the commissary.Pf
(2) Multiple or disposable utensils may be used for food handling on the unit. There shall be at the beginning of each
day's business a sufficient supply of clean utensils necessary to properly prepare, assemble, or dispense the food. For
mobile food units that do not have a warewashing sink on the unit, this supply shall consist of at least one of each type
of utensil for every two hours of operation. If the unit operates less than four hours in a day, the unit shall provide a
minimum of two sets of each type of utensil. Utensils shall not be used if they become contaminated.Pf
(3) Class IV mobile food units must provide a sink with at least three compartments.Pf
(4) A Class II or III mobile food unit that is designed with a small three compartment sink that not be used for
warewashing is not required to remove the sink from the unit.
(H) Temporary food establishments are not required to provide warewashing facilities on the premises if multiple utensils are
provided as specified in subparagraph (G)(2) of section 4-301.12 and the operator uses a licensed restaurant or commissary as
a base of operation.Pf
4-301.13 Drainboards.
Drainboards, utensil racks, or tables large enough to accommodate all soiled and cleaned items that may accumulate during
hours of operation shall be provided for necessary utensil holding before cleaning and after sanitizing.
4-301.14 Ventilation Hood Systems, Adequacy.
Ventilation hood systems and devices shall be sufficient in number and capacity to prevent grease or condensation from
collecting on walls and ceilings. For mobile food units, violations of this section shall be considered a priority foundation
item.
4-301.15 Clothes Washers and Dryers.
(A) Except as specified in ¶ (B) of this section, if work clothes or linens are laundered on the premises, a mechanical clothes
washer and dryer shall be provided and used.
(B) If on-premises laundering is limited to wiping cloths intended to be used moist, or wiping cloths are air-dried as specified
under § 4-901.12, a mechanical clothes washer and dryer need not be provided.
4-302.11 Utensils, Consumer Self-Service.
A food dispensing utensil shall be available for each container displayed at a consumer self-service unit such as a buffet or
salad bar.Pf
4-302.12 Food Temperature Measuring Devices.
(A) Food temperature measuring devices shall be provided and readily accessible for use in ensuring attainment and
maintenance of food temperatures as specified under Chapter 3. Pf
(B) A temperature measuring device with a suitable small-diameter probe that is designed to measure the temperature of thin
masses shall be provided and readily accessible to accurately measure the temperature in thin foods such as meat patties and
fish filets. Pf
4-302.13 Temperature Measuring Devices, Manual Warewashing.
In manual warewashing operations, a temperature measuring device shall be provided and readily accessible for frequently
measuring the washing and sanitizing temperatures.
52
4-302.14 Sanitizing Solutions, Testing Devices.
A test kit or other device that accurately measures the concentration in mg/L of sanitizing solutions shall be provided.Pf
4-4 LOCATION AND INSTALLATION
Subparts 4-401 Location
4-402 Installation
4-401.11 Equipment, Clothes Washers and Dryers, and Storage Cabinets, Contamination
Prevention.
(A) Except as specified in ¶ (B) of this section, equipment, a cabinet used for the storage of food, or a cabinet that is used to
store cleaned and sanitized equipment, utensils, laundered linens, and single-service and single-use articles may not be
located:
(1) In locker rooms;
(2) In toilet rooms;
(3) In garbage rooms;
(4) In mechanical rooms;
(5) Under sewer lines that are not shielded to intercept potential drips;
(6) Under leaking water lines including leaking automatic fire sprinkler heads or under lines on which water has
condensed;
(7) Under open stairwells; or
(8) Under other sources of contamination.
(B) A storage cabinet used for linens or single-service or single-use articles may be stored in a locker room.
(C) If a mechanical clothes washer or dryer is provided, it shall be located so that the washer or dryer is protected from
contamination and only where there is no exposed food; clean equipment, utensils, and linens; and unwrapped single-service
and single-use articles.
4-402.11 Fixed Equipment, Spacing or Sealing.
(A) Equipment that is fixed because it is not easily movable shall be installed so that it is:
(1) Spaced to allow access for cleaning along the sides, behind, and above the equipment;
(2) Spaced from adjoining equipment, walls, and ceilings a distance of not more than 1 millimeter or one thirty-second
inch; or
(3) Sealed to adjoining equipment or walls, if the equipment is exposed to spillage or seepage.
(B) Counter-mounted equipment that is not easily movable shall be installed to allow cleaning of the equipment and areas
underneath and around the equipment by being:
(1) Sealed; or
(2) Elevated on legs as specified under ¶ 4-402.12(D).
4-402.12 Fixed Equipment, Elevation or Sealing.
(A) Except as specified in ¶¶ (B) and (C) of this section, floor-mounted equipment that is not easily movable shall be sealed
to the floor or elevated on legs that provide at least a 15 centimeter (6 inch) clearance between the floor and the equipment.
(B) If no part of the floor under the floor-mounted equipment is more than 15 centimeters (6 inches) from the point of
cleaning access, the clearance space may be only 10 centimeters (4 inches).
(C) This section does not apply to display shelving units, display refrigeration units, and display freezer units located in the
consumer shopping areas of a retail food store, if the floor under the units is maintained clean.
(D) Except as specified in ¶ (E) of this section, counter-mounted equipment that is not easily movable shall be elevated on
legs that provide at least a 10 centimeter (4 inch) clearance between the table and the equipment.
(E) The clearance space between the table and counter-mounted equipment may be:
(1) 7.5 centimeters (3 inches) if the horizontal distance of the table top under the equipment is no more than 50
centimeters (20 inches) from the point of access for cleaning; or
(2) 5 centimeters (2 inches) if the horizontal distance of the table top under the equipment is no more than 7.5
centimeters (3 inches) from the point of access for cleaning
53
4-5 MAINTENANCE AND OPERATION
Subparts 4-501 Equipment
4-502 Utensils and Temperature and Pressure Measuring Devices
4-501.11 Good Repair and Proper Adjustment.
(A) Equipment shall be maintained in a state of repair and condition that meets the requirements specified under Parts 4-1
and 4-2.
(B) Equipment components such as doors, seals, hinges, fasteners, and kick plates shall be kept intact, tight, and adjusted in
accordance with manufacturer's specifications.
(C) Cutting or piercing parts of can openers shall be kept sharp to minimize the creation of metal fragments that can
contaminate food when the container is opened.
4-501.12 Cutting Surfaces.
Surfaces such as cutting blocks and boards that are subject to scratching and scoring shall be resurfaced if they can no longer
be effectively cleaned and sanitized, or discarded if they are not capable of being resurfaced.
4-501.13 Microwave Ovens.
Microwave ovens shall meet the safety standards specified in 21 CFR 1030.10 Microwave ovens.
4-501.14 Warewashing Equipment, Cleaning Frequency.
A warewashing machine; the compartments of sinks, basins, or other receptacles used for washing and rinsing equipment,
utensils, or raw foods, or laundering wiping cloths; and drainboards or other equipment used to substitute for drainboards as
specified under § 4-301.13 shall be cleaned:
(A) Before use;
(B) Throughout the day at a frequency necessary to prevent recontamination of equipment and utensils and to ensure that the
equipment performs its intended function; and
(C) If used, at least every 24 hours.
4-501.15 Warewashing Machines, Manufacturers' Operating Instructions.
(A) A warewashing machine and its auxiliary components shall be operated in accordance with the machine's data plate and
other manufacturer's instructions.
(B) A warewashing machine's conveyor speed or automatic cycle times shall be maintained accurately timed in accordance
with manufacturer's specifications.
4-501.16 Warewashing Sinks, Use Limitation.
(A) A warewashing sink may not be used for handwashing as specified under § 2-301.15.
(B) If a warewashing sink is used to wash wiping cloths, wash produce, or thaw food, the sink shall be cleaned as specified
under § 4-501.14 before and after each time it is used to wash wiping cloths or wash produce or thaw food. Sinks used to
wash or thaw food shall be sanitized as specified under Part 4-7 before and after using the sink to wash produce or thaw food.
4-501.17 Warewashing Equipment, Cleaning Agents.
When used for warewashing, the wash compartment of a sink, mechanical warewasher, or wash receptacle of alternative
manual warewashing equipment as specified in ¶ 4-301.12(C), shall contain a wash solution of soap, detergent, acid cleaner,
alkaline cleaner, degreaser, abrasive cleaner, or other cleaning agent according to the cleaning agent manufacturer's label
instructions. Pf
4-501.18 Warewashing Equipment, Clean Solutions.
The wash, rinse, and sanitize solutions shall be maintained clean.
4-501.19 Manual Warewashing Equipment, Wash Solution Temperature.
The temperature of the wash solution in manual warewashing equipment shall be maintained at not less than 43oC (110oF) or
the temperature specified on the cleaning agent manufacturer's label instructions. Pf
54
4-501.110 Mechanical Warewashing Equipment, Wash Solution Temperature.
(A) The temperature of the wash solution in spray type warewashers that use hot water to sanitize may not be less than:
(1) For a stationary rack, single temperature machine, 74°C (165°F);Pf
(2) For a stationary rack, dual temperature machine, 66°C (150°F); Pf
(3) For a single tank, conveyor, dual temperature machine, 71°C (160°F);Pf or
(4) For a multitank, conveyor, multitemperature machine, 66°C (150°F).Pf
(B) The temperature of the wash solution in spray-type warewashers that use chemicals to sanitize may not be less than 49°C
(120°F). Pf
4-501.111 Manual Warewashing Equipment, Hot Water Sanitization Temperatures.
If immersion in hot water is used for sanitizing in a manual operation, the temperature of the water shall be maintained at
77oC (171oF) or above. P
4-501.112 Mechanical Warewashing Equipment, Hot Water Sanitization Temperatures.
(A) Except as specified in ¶ (B) of this section, in a mechanical operation, the temperature of the fresh hot water sanitizing
rinse as it enters the manifold may not be more than 90°C (194°F), or less than: Pf
(1) For a stationary rack, single temperature machine, 74°C (165°F);Pf or
(2) For all other machines, 82°C (180°F). Pf
(B) The maximum temperature specified under ¶ (A) of this section, does not apply to the high pressure and temperature
systems with wand-type, hand-held, spraying devices used for the in-place cleaning and sanitizing of equipment such as meat
saws.
4-501.113 Mechanical Warewashing Equipment, Sanitization Pressure.
The flow pressure of the fresh hot water sanitizing rinse in a warewashing machine, as measured in the water line
immediately downstream or upstream from the fresh hot water sanitizing rinse control value, shall be within the range
specified on the machine manufacturer's data plate and may not be less than 35 kilopascals (5 pounds per square inch) or
more than 200 kilopascals (30 pounds per square inch).
4-501.114 Manual and Mechanical Warewashing Equipment, Chemical Sanitization -
Temperature, pH, Concentration, and Hardness.
A chemical sanitizer used in a sanitizing solution for a manual or mechanical operation at contact times specified under ¶ 4-
703.11(C) shall meet the criteria specified under § 7-204.11 Sanitizers, Criteria, shall be used in accordance with the EPA-
registered label use instructions, and shall be used as follows P:
(A) A chlorine solution shall have a minimum temperature based on the concentration and pH of the solution as listed in the
following chart; P
Concentration Range Minimum Temperature
mg/L pH 10 or less oC (oF) pH 8 or less oC (oF)
25 - 49 49 (120) 49 (120)
50 - 99 38 (100) 24 ( 75)
100 13 ( 55) 13 ( 55)
(B) An iodine solution shall have a:
(1) Minimum temperature of 20°C (68°F), P
(2) pH of 5.0 or less or a pH no higher than the level for which the manufacturer specifies the solution is effective, P and
(3) Concentration between 12.5 mg/L and 25 mg/L; P
(C) A quaternary ammonium compound solution shall:
(1) Have a minimum temperature of 24°C (75°F), P
(2) Have a concentration as specified under § 7-204.11 and as indicated by the manufacturer's use directions included in
the labeling, P and
(3) Be used only in water with 500 mg/L hardness or less or in water having a hardness no greater than specified by the
EPA-registered label use instructions; P
55
(D) If another solution of a chemical specified under ¶¶ (A) - (C) of this section is used, the permit holder shall demonstrate
to the regulatory authority that the solution achieves sanitization and the use of the solution shall be approved; P or
(E) If a chemical sanitizer other than chlorine, iodine, or a quaternary ammonium compound is used, it shall be applied in
accordance with the EPA-registered label use instructions. P
4-501.115 Manual Warewashing Equipment, Chemical Sanitization Using Detergent-
Sanitizers. [Deleted]
4-501.116 Warewashing Equipment, Determining Chemical Sanitizer Concentration.
Concentration of the sanitizing solution shall be accurately determined by using a test kit or other device.Pf
4-502.11 Good Repair and Calibration.
(A) Utensils shall be maintained in a state of repair or condition that complies with the requirements specified under Parts 4-1
and 4-2 or shall be discarded.
(B) Food temperature measuring devices shall be calibrated in accordance with manufacturer's specifications as necessary to
ensure their accuracy. Pf
(C) Ambient air temperature, water pressure, and water temperature measuring devices shall be maintained in good repair and
be accurate within the intended range of use.
4-502.12 Single-Service and Single-Use Articles, Required Use.
A food establishment without facilities specified under Parts 4-6 and 4-7 for cleaning and sanitizing kitchenware and
tableware shall provide only single-use kitchenware, single-service articles, and single-use articles for use by food employees
and single-service articles for use by consumers.P
4-502.13 Single-Service and Single-Use Articles, Use Limitation.
(A) Single-service and single-use articles may not be reused.
(B) The bulk milk container dispensing tube shall be cut on the diagonal leaving no more than one inch protruding from the
chilled dispensing head.
(C) (1) A food or beverage provider or convenience store may not provide a single-use plastic straw to a consumer unless the
consumer specifically requests the single-use plastic straw.
(2) A food and beverage facility may offer a single-use plastic straw to a consumer seated in or on a vehicle.
(3) A convenience store may leave single-use straws in an unattended location if they do not have space in a location
attended by employees.
(4) A convenience store may sell or offer single-use straws for sale in bulk or unconnected with a sale or provision of
food or a beverage.
4-502.14 Shells, Use Limitation.
Mollusk and crustacea shells may not be used more than once as serving containers.
4-6 CLEANING OF EQUIPMENT AND UTENSILS
Subparts 4-601 Objective
4-602 Frequency
4-603 Methods
4-601.11 Equipment, Food-Contact Surfaces, Nonfood-Contact Surfaces, and Utensils.
(A) Equipment food-contact surfaces and utensils shall be clean to sight and touch. Pf
(B) The food-contact surfaces of cooking equipment and pans shall be kept free of encrusted grease deposits and other
soil accumulations.
(C) Nonfood-contact surfaces of equipment shall be kept free of an accumulation of dust, dirt, food residue, and other
debris.
56
4-602.11 Equipment Food-Contact Surfaces and Utensils.
(A) Equipment food-contact surfaces and utensils shall be cleaned:
(1) Except as specified in ¶ (B) of this section, before each use with a different type of raw animal food such as beef,
fish, lamb, pork, or poultry; P
(2) Each time there is a change from working with raw foods to working with ready-to-eat foods; P
(3) Between uses with raw fruits and vegetables and with potentially hazardous food (time/temperature control for safety
food); P
(4) Before using or storing a food temperature measuring device; P and
(5) At any time during the operation when contamination may have occurred. P
(B) Subparagraph (A)(1) of this section does not apply if the food-contact surface or utensil is in contact with a succession of
different raw animal foods each requiring a higher cooking temperature as specified under § 3-401.11 than the previous
food, such as preparing raw fish followed by cutting raw poultry on the same cutting board.
(C) Except as specified in ¶ (D) of this section, if used with potentially hazardous food (time/temperature control for safety
food), equipment food-contact surfaces and utensils shall be cleaned throughout the day at least every 4 hours. P
(D) Surfaces of utensils and equipment contacting potentially hazardous food (time/temperature control for safety food) may
be cleaned less frequently than every 4 hours if:
(1) In storage, containers of potentially hazardous food (time/temperature control for safety food) and their contents are
maintained at temperatures specified under Chapter 3 and the containers are cleaned when they are empty;
(2) Utensils and equipment are used to prepare food in a refrigerated room or area that is maintained at one of the
temperatures in the following chart and:
(a) The utensils and equipment are cleaned at the frequency in the following chart that corresponds to the
temperature; and
Temperature Cleaning Frequency
5.0oC (41oF) or less 24 hours
>5.0oC - 7.2oC (>41oF - 45oF) 20 hours
>7.2oC - 10.0oC (>45oF - 50oF) 16 hours
>10.0oC - 12.8oC (>50oF - 55oF) 10 hours
(b) The cleaning frequency based on the ambient temperature of the refrigerated room or area is documented in the
food establishment.
(3) Containers in serving situations such as salad bars, delis, and cafeteria lines hold ready-to-eat potentially hazardous
food (time/temperature control for safety food) that is maintained at the temperatures specified under Chapter 3, are
intermittently combined with additional supplies of the same food that is at the required temperature, and the containers
are cleaned at least every 24 hours;
(4) Temperature measuring devices are maintained in contact with food, such as when left in a container of deli food or
in a roast, held at temperatures specified under Chapter 3;
(5) Equipment is used for storage of packaged consumer or unpackaged food such as a reach-in refrigerator and the
equipment is cleaned at a frequency necessary to preclude accumulation of soil residues;
(6) The cleaning schedule is approved based on consideration of:
(a) Characteristics of the equipment and its use,
(b) The type of food involved,
(c) The amount of food residue accumulation, and
(d) The temperature at which the food is maintained during the operation and the potential for the rapid and
progressive multiplication of pathogenic or toxigenic microorganisms that are capable of causing foodborne
disease; or
(7) In-use utensils are intermittently stored in a container of water in which the water is maintained at 57°C (135°F) or
more or 5°F (41°F) or less and the utensils and container are cleaned at least every 24 hours or at a frequency
necessary to preclude accumulation of soil residues.
(E) Except when dry cleaning methods are used as specified under § 4-603.11, surfaces of utensils and equipment contacting
food that is not potentially hazardous (time/temperature control for safety food) shall be cleaned:
(1) At any time when contamination may have occurred;
(2) At least every 24 hours for iced tea dispensers and consumer self-service utensils such as tongs, scoops, or ladles;
57
(3) Before restocking consumer self-service equipment and utensils such as condiment dispensers and display containers;
and
(4) In equipment such as ice bins and beverage dispensing nozzles and enclosed components of equipment such as ice
makers, cooking oil storage tanks and distribution lines, beverage and syrup dispensing lines or tubes, coffee bean
grinders, and water vending equipment:
(a) At a frequency specified by the manufacturer, or
(b) Absent manufacturer specifications, at a frequency necessary to preclude accumulation of soil or mold.
4-602.12 Cooking and Baking Equipment.
(A) The food-contact surfaces of cooking and baking equipment shall be cleaned at least every 24 hours. This section does
not apply to hot oil cooking and filtering equipment if it is cleaned as specified in Subparagraph 4-602.11(D)(6).
(B) The cavities and door seals of microwave ovens shall be cleaned at least every 24 hours by using the manufacturer's
recommended cleaning procedure.
4-602.13 Nonfood-Contact Surfaces.
Nonfood-contact surfaces of equipment shall be cleaned at a frequency necessary to preclude accumulation of soil residues.
4-603.11 Dry Cleaning.
(A) If used, dry cleaning methods such as brushing, scraping, and vacuuming shall contact only surfaces that are soiled with
dry food residues that are not potentially hazardous (time/temperature control for safety food).
(B) Cleaning equipment used in dry cleaning food-contact surfaces may not be used for any other purpose.
4-603.12 Precleaning.
(A) Food debris on equipment and utensils shall be scrapped over a waste disposal unit or garbage receptacle or shall be
removed in a warewashing machine with a prewash cycle.
(B) If necessary for effective cleaning, utensils and equipment shall be preflushed, presoaked, or scrubbed with abrasives.
4-603.13 Loading of Soiled Items, Warewashing Machines.
Soiled items to be cleaned in a warewashing machine shall be loaded into racks, trays, or baskets or onto conveyors in a
position that:
(A) Exposes the items to the unobstructed spray from all cycles; and
(B) Allows the items to drain.
4-603.14 Wet Cleaning.
(A) Equipment food-contact surfaces and utensils shall be effectively washed to remove or completely loosen soils by using
the manual or mechanical means necessary such as the application of detergents containing wetting agents and emulsifiers;
acid, alkaline, or abrasive cleaners; hot water; brushes; scouring pads; high-pressure sprays; or ultrasonic devices.
(B) The washing procedures selected shall be based on the type and purpose of the equipment or utensil, and on the type of
soil to be removed.
4-603.15 Washing, Procedures for Alternative Manual Warewashing Equipment.
If washing in sink compartments or a warewashing machine is impractical such as when the equipment is fixed or the utensils
are too large, washing shall be done by using alternative manual warewashing equipment as specified in ¶ 4-301.12(C) in
accordance with the following procedures:
(A) Equipment shall be disassembled as necessary to allow access of the detergent solution to all parts;
(B) Equipment components and utensils shall be scrapped or rough cleaned to remove food particle accumulation; and
(C) Equipment and utensils shall be washed as specified under ¶ 4-603.14(A).
4-603.16 Rinsing Procedures.
Washed utensils and equipment shall be rinsed so that abrasives are removed and cleaning chemicals are removed or diluted
through the use of water by using one of the following procedures:
(A) Use of a distinct, separate water rinse after washing and before sanitizing if using:
(1) A 3-compartment sink,
(2) Alternative manual warewashing equipment equivalent to a 3-compartment sink as specified in ¶ 4-301.12(C), or
(3) A 3-step washing, rinsing, and sanitizing procedure in a warewashing system for CIP equipment;
(B) [Deleted]
58
(C) [Deleted]
(D) If using a warewashing machine that does not recycle the sanitizing solution as specified under ¶ (E) of this section, or
alternative manual warewashing equipment such as sprayers, use of a nondistinct water rinse that is:
(1) Integrated in the application of the sanitizing solution, and
(2) Wasted immediately after each application; or
(E) If using a warewashing machine that recycles the sanitizing solution for use in the next wash cycle, use of a nondistinct
water rinse that is integrated in the application of the sanitizing solution.
4-7 SANITIZATION OF EQUIPMENT AND UTENSILS
Subparts 4-701 Objective
4-702 Frequency
4-703 Methods
4-701.10 Food-Contact Surfaces and Utensils.
Equipment food-contact surfaces and utensils shall be sanitized.
4-702.11 Before Use After Cleaning.
Utensils and food-contact surfaces of equipment shall be sanitized before use after cleaning.P
4-703.11 Hot Water and Chemical.
After being cleaned, equipment food-contact surfaces and utensils shall be sanitized in:
(A) Hot water manual operations by immersion for at least 30 seconds and as specified under § 4-501.111; P
(B) Hot water mechanical operations by being cycled through equipment that is set up as specified under §§ 4-501.15, 4-
501.112, and 4-501.113 and achieving a utensil surface temperature of 71°C (160°F) as measured by an irreversible
registering temperature indicator; P or
(C) Chemical manual or mechanical operations, including the application of sanitizing chemicals by immersion, manual
swabbing, brushing, or pressure spraying methods, using a solution as specified under § 4-501.114. Contact times shall be
consistent with those on EPA-registered label use instructions by providing:
(1) Except as specified under Subparagraph (C)(2) of this section, a contact time of at least 10 seconds for a chlorine
solution specified under ¶ 4-501.114(A), P
(2) A contact time of at least 7 seconds for a chlorine solution of 50 mg/L that has a pH of 10 or less and a temperature
of at least 38°C (100°F) or a pH of 8 or less and a temperature of at least 24°C (75°F), P
(3) A contact time of at least 30 seconds for other chemical sanitizing solutions, P or
(4) A contact time used in relationship with a combination of temperature, concentration, and pH that, when evaluated
for efficacy, yields sanitization as defined in Subparagraph 1-201.10(B). P
59
4-8 LAUNDERING
Subparts 4-801 Objective
4-802 Frequency
4-803 Methods
4-801.11 Clean Linens.
Clean linens shall be free from food residues and other soiling matter.
4-802.11 Specifications.
(A) Linens that do not come in direct contact with food shall be laundered between operations if they become wet, sticky, or
visibly soiled.
(B) Cloth gloves used as specified in ¶ 3-304.15(D) shall be laundered before being used with a different type of raw animal
food such as beef, fish, lamb, pork or poultry.
(C) Linens and napkins that are used as specified under § 3-304.13 and cloth napkins shall be laundered between each use.
(D) Wet wiping cloths shall be laundered daily.
(E) Dry wiping cloths shall be laundered as necessary to prevent contamination of food and clean serving utensils.
4-803.11 Storage of Soiled Linens.
Soiled linens shall be kept in clean, nonabsorbent receptacles or clean, washable laundry bags and stored and transported to
prevent contamination of food, clean equipment, clean utensils, and single-service and single-use articles.
4-803.12 Mechanical Washing.
(A) Except as specified in ¶ (B) of this section, linens shall be mechanically washed.
(B) In food establishments in which only wiping cloths are laundered as specified in ¶ 4-301.15(B), the wiping cloths may be
laundered in a mechanical washer, sink designated only for laundering wiping cloths, or a warewashing or food preparation
sink that is cleaned as specified under § 4-501.14.
4-803.13 Use of Laundry Facilities.
(A) Except as specified in ¶ (B) of this section, laundry facilities on the premises of a food establishment shall be used only
for the washing and drying of items used in the operation of the establishment.
(B) Separate laundry facilities located on the premises for the purpose of general laundering such as for institutions providing
boarding and lodging may also be used for laundering food establishment items.
4-9 PROTECTION OF CLEAN ITEMS
Subparts 4-901 Drying
4-902 Lubricating and Reassembling
4-903 Storing
4-904 Handling
4-901.11 Equipment and Utensils, Air-Drying Required.
After cleaning and sanitizing, equipment and utensils:
(A) Shall be air-dried or used after adequate draining as specified in the first paragraph of 40 CFR 180.940 Tolerance
exemptions for active and inert ingredients for use in antimicrobial formulations (food-contact surface sanitizing solutions),
before contact with food; and
(B) May not be cloth dried except that utensils that have been air-dried may be polished with cloths that are maintained
clean and dry.
4-901.12 Wiping Cloths, Air-Drying Locations.
Wiping cloths laundered in a food establishment that does not have a mechanical clothes dryer as specified in ¶ 4-301.15(B)
shall be air-dried in a location and in a manner that prevents contamination of food, equipment, utensils, linens, and single-
service and single-use articles and the wiping cloths. This section does not apply if wiping cloths are stored after laundering
in a sanitizing solution as specified under § 4-501.114.
60
4-902.11 Food-Contact Surfaces.
Lubricants as specified under section 7-205.11 shall be applied to food-contact surfaces that require lubrication in a manner
that does not contaminate food-contact surfaces.
4-902.12 Equipment.
Equipment shall be reassembled so that food-contact surfaces are not contaminated.
4-903.11 Equipment, Utensils, Linens, and Single-Service and Single-Use Articles.
(A) Except as specified in ¶ (D) of this section, cleaned equipment and utensils, laundered linens, and single-service and
single-use articles shall be stored:
(1) In a clean, dry location;
(2) Where they are not exposed to splash, dust, or other contamination; and
(3) At least 15 cm (6 inches) above the floor.
(B) Clean equipment and utensils shall be stored as specified under ¶ (A) of this section and shall be stored:
(1) In a self-draining position that allows air drying; and
(2) Covered or inverted.
(C) Single-service and single-use articles shall be stored as specified under ¶ (A) of this section and shall be kept in the
original protective package or stored by using other means that afford protection from contamination until used.
(D) Items that are kept in closed packages may be stored less than 15 cm (6 inches) above the floor on dollies, pallets, racks,
and skids that are designed as specified under § 4-204.122.
4-903.12 Prohibitions.
(A) Except as specified in ¶ (B) of this section, cleaned and sanitized equipment, utensils, laundered linens, and single-
service and single-use articles may not be stored:
(1) In locker rooms;
(2) In toilet rooms;
(3) In garbage rooms;
(4) In mechanical rooms;
(5) Under sewer lines that are not shielded to intercept potential drips;
(6) Under leaking water lines including leaking automatic fire sprinkler heads or under lines on which water has
condensed;
(7) Under open stairwells; or
(8) Under other sources of contamination.
(B) Laundered linens and single-service and single-use articles that are packaged or in a facility such as a cabinet may be
stored in a locker room.
4-904.11 Kitchenware and Tableware.
(A) Single-service and single-use articles and cleaned and sanitized utensils shall be handled, displayed, and dispensed so
that contamination of food- and lip-contact surfaces is prevented.
(B) Knives, forks, and spoons that are not prewrapped shall be presented so that only the handles are touched by employees
and by consumers if consumer self-service is provided.
(C) Except as specified under ¶ (B) of this section, single-service articles that are intended for food- or lip-contact shall be
furnished for consumer self-service with the original individual wrapper intact or from an approved dispenser.
4-904.12 Soiled and Clean Tableware.
Soiled tableware shall be removed from consumer eating and drinking areas and handled so that clean tableware is not
contaminated.
4-904.13 Preset Tableware.
(A) Except as specified in ¶ (B) of this section, tableware that is preset shall be protected from contamination by being
wrapped, covered, or inverted.
(B) Preset tableware may be exposed if:
(1) Unused settings are removed when a consumer is seated; or
(2) Settings not removed when a consumer is seated are cleaned and sanitized before further use.
61
4-904.14 Rinsing Equipment and Utensils after Cleaning and Sanitizing.
After being cleaned and sanitized, equipment and utensils shall not be rinsed before air drying or use unless:
(A) The rinse is applied directly from a potable water supply by a warewashing machine that is maintained and operated as
specified under Subparts 4-204 and 4-501; and
(B) The rinse is applied only after the equipment and utensils have been sanitized by the application of hot water or by the
application of a chemical sanitizer solution whose EPA-registered label use instructions call for rinsing off the sanitizer after
it is applied in a commercial warewashing machine.
Chapter 5
Water, Plumbing and Waste
Parts
5-1 WATER
5-2 PLUMBING SYSTEM
5-3 MOBILE WATER TANK AND MOBILE FOOD ESTABLISHMENT WATER TANK
5-4 SEWAGE, OTHER LIQUID WASTE, AND RAINWATER
5-5 REFUSE, RECYCLABLES, AND RETURNABLES
5-1 WATER
Subparts 5-101 Source
5-102 Quality
5-103 Quantity and Availability
5-104 Distribution, Delivery, and Retention
5-101.11 Approved System.
Drinking water shall be obtained from an approved source that is:
(A) A public water system;P or
(B) A nonpublic water system that is constructed, maintained, and operated according to law.P
5-101.12 System Flushing and Disinfection.
A drinking water system shall be flushed and disinfected before being placed in service after construction, repair, or
modification and after an emergency situation, such as a flood, that may introduce contaminants to the system.P
5-101.13 Bottled Drinking Water.
Bottled drinking water used or sold in a food establishment shall be obtained from approved sources in accordance with 21
CFR 129 - Processing and Bottling of Bottled drinking water.P
5-102.11 Standards.
Except as specified under section 5-102.12 (A), water from a public water system shall meet 40 CFR 141 – National Primary
Drinking Water Regulations and OAR chapter 333, division 061.P The following drinking water standards apply to licensed
food establishments that are not regulated under OAR chapter 333, division 061:
(A) General Sampling Requirements:
(1) All samples required by this rule must be analyzed and collected as prescribed by OAR 333-061-0036(1)(a) and (b).P
(2) All samples required by this rule must be analyzed by a laboratory accredited by the Oregon Environmental
Laboratory Accreditation Program (ORELAP) and must be handled and documented in accordance with ORELAP
standards.P
(3) Samples submitted to laboratories for analysis shall be clearly identified with the name of the water system, facility
license number, sampling date, time, sample location identifying the sample tap, the name of the person collecting the
sample and whether it is a routine or a repeat sample.P
62
(a) Routine: These are samples collected from established sampling locations within a water system at specified
frequencies to satisfy monitoring requirements as prescribed in this rule;P
(b) Repeat: These are samples collected as a follow-up to a routine sample that is positive for coliform bacteria or
that exceeds the maximum contaminant level for nitrate as specified in OAR 333-061-0030(1);P
(4) Reporting: All sample results must be submitted to the regulatory authority by the 10th of the month following the
end of the applicable sampling period.P
(5) The regulatory authority may collect additional samples to determine compliance with applicable requirements of
these rules.P
(B) Sampling for coliform bacteria:
(1) For seasonal establishments, one sample must be collected prior to the operational period of the facility and each
subsequent calendar quarter while open to the public. A minimum of two samples shall be required for coliform,
regardless of length of operation.P
(2) For year round facilities, facilities utilizing surface water sources must collect one sample every month. Facilities
utilizing groundwater sources must collect one sample every calendar quarter.P
(3) Domestic kitchens licensed by the Oregon Department of Agriculture must test annually for coliform bacteria. If
water is a major ingredient of the product, then additional water testing may be required by the regulatory authority, not
to exceed the standards listed in this rule.
(C) Sampling for chemicals:
(1) Every facility must collect one arsenic sample before beginning operation for the first time. This requirement does
not apply to facilities that were previously regulated under OAR chapter 333, division 061 and that have sampling results
from samples collected prior to January 1, 2003.P
(2) Every facility must collect one nitrate sample every year while open to the public.P
(D) Additional sampling may be required for coliform bacteria, arsenic, or nitrate at the discretion of the regulatory authority.
It is the responsibility of the operator to correct any problems or deficiencies and to assure that water provided to the public
does not present a risk to public health.P
(E) MCL Violations: An item is not considered a violation until confirmed by a second sample collected within 24 hours. For
coliform bacteria, four repeat samples must be collected within 24 hours of the original positive sample.P
(1) Total coliform: Facilities must report samples positive for total coliform to the regulatory authority within 24 hours
of being notified of the sample results.P
(2) Fecal coliform: Facilities must report samples positive for E. coli to the regulatory authority within 24 hours of being
notified of the sample results.P
(a) Facilities must publish public notification for this potential acute health risk as prescribed by OAR 333-061-
0042.P
(b) An alternative procedure approved by the regulatory authority must be in place before serving the public.P
(3) Facilities must report samples that exceed the MCL for nitrate as specified in OAR 333-061-0030(1) to the regulatory
authority within at least 24 hours.P
(a) Public notification is required.P
(b) Bottled water must be provided to the public upon request.P
(F) Public Notice: All public notification must be posted conspicuously on site and must include:
(1) A description of the violation or situation of concern;P
(2) Corrective actions taken to improve water quality;P
(3) Any potential adverse health effects;P
(4) The population at risk;P
(5) The alternative measures in place to provide safe drinking water.P
(G) Surface Water Sources: New facilities with surface water sources not regulated under OAR chapter 333, division 061
shall not be licensable after January 1, 2005. Facilities existing prior to January 1, 2005 in compliance with OAR 333-061-
0032 may continue to operate.P
(H) Plan Review: All new facilities that are not regulated by OAR 333-061 must submit plans to the regulatory authority for
review prior to operation. Existing facilities must submit plans to the regulatory authority for review prior to construction or
major modification of the system. Systems regulated prior to January 1, 2003 by OAR chapter 333, division 061 are not
required to re-submit plans. Plan review must be conducted in accordance with the procedures specified in OAR 333-061-
0060.P
5-102.12 Nondrinking Water.
(A) A nondrinking water supply shall be used only if its use is approved.P
(B) Nondrinking water shall be used only for nonculinary purposes such as air conditioning, nonfood equipment cooling, and
fire protection.P
63
5-102.13 Sampling.
Except when used as specified under § 5-102.12, water from a nonpublic water system shall be sampled and tested at least
annually and as required by state water quality regulations.Pf
5-102.14 Sample Report.
The most recent sample report for the nonpublic water system shall be retained on file in the food establishment or the report
shall be maintained as specified by state water quality regulations.
5-103.11 Capacity.
(A) The water source and system shall be of sufficient capacity to meet the peak water demands of the food establishment. Pf
(B) Hot water generation and distribution systems shall be sufficient to meet the peak hot water demands throughout the food
establishment. Pf
(C) Hot and cold or tempered water must be provided at all handwashing sinks in the establishment.Pf
5-103.12 Pressure.
Water under pressure shall be provided to all fixtures, equipment, and nonfood equipment that are required to use water
except that water supplied as specified under ¶¶ 5-104.12(A) and (B) to a temporary food establishment or in response to a
temporary interruption of a water supply need not be under pressure.Pf
5-104.11 System.
Water shall be received from the source through the use of:
(A) An approved public water main;Pf or
(B) One or more of the following that shall be constructed, maintained, and operated according to law:Pf
(1) Nonpublic water main, water pumps, pipes, hoses, connections, and other appurtenances,Pf
(2) Water transport vehicles,Pf and
(3) Water containers.Pf
5-104.12 Alternative Water Supply.
(A) Water meeting the requirements specified under Subparts 5-101, 5-102, and 5-103 shall be made available for a mobile
facility, for a temporary food establishment without a permanent water supply, and for a food establishment with a temporary
interruption of its water supply through:
(1) A supply of containers of commercially bottled drinking water; Pf
(2) One or more closed portable water containers; Pf
(3) An enclosed vehicular water tank; Pf
(4) An on-premises water storage tank; Pf or
(5) Piping, tubing, or hoses connected to an adjacent approved source. Pf
(B) If approved by the local public health authority, water for single-event temporary food establishments without a public
water supply may be obtained from a well that has been tested for coliform bacteria within 60 days prior to the event. The
local public health authority may require additional testing or an evaluation of the well and premises as part of the approval
process. Sampling, reporting and correction of MCL violations shall be in accordance with the applicable provisions of 5-
102.11.Pf
(C) The regulatory authority may grant a temporary variance from requirements of subparts 5-101, 5-102, and 5-103 of the
2009 FDA Food Code by continuing or re-issuing previously issued permits where:
(1) Failure to comply with the code requirements is due to a failure of a community, municipal or public utility water
supply system to meet the regulatory authority's requirements;
(2) The regulatory authority is satisfied that necessary remedial action is ongoing or reasonably imminent in connection
with such water supply system; and
(3) Continuance or re-issuance of the permit is conditional upon the carrying out of such remedial action and the
provision of such other measures by the certificate or license holder which will in the judgment of the regulatory
authority afford reasonable interim protection to the public health including, but not limited to, adequate warnings to
public and personnel as to the safety of the water delivered to the premises from the distribution system and notice of
measures to avoid use or consumption of such water or to render it safe for consumption; adequate warnings as to the
need for supervision of children and others needing supervision against use of such water; provision of alternative
potable water and adequate notification as to its availability; and measures to avoid the use and the availability of water
on the premises.Pf
64
5-2 PLUMBING SYSTEM
Subparts 5-201 Materials
5-202 Design, Construction, and Installation
5-203 Numbers and Capacities
5-204 Location and Placement
5-205 Operation and Maintenance
5-201.11 Approved.
(A) A plumbing system and hoses conveying water shall be constructed and repaired with approved materials according to
law.P
(B) A water filter shall be made of safe materials.P
5-202.11 Approved System and Cleanable Fixtures.
(A) A plumbing system shall be designed, constructed, and installed according to law.P
(B) A plumbing fixture such as a handwashing sink, toilet, or urinal shall be easily cleanable.
5-202.12 Handwashing Facility, Installation.
(A) A handwashing sink shall be equipped to provide water at a temperature of at least 38oC (100oF) through a mixing valve
or combination faucet.Pf
(B) A steam mixing valve may not be used at a handwashing sink.
(C) A self-closing, slow-closing, or metering faucet shall provide a flow of water for at least 15 seconds without the need to
reactivate the faucet.
(D) An automatic handwashing facility shall be installed in accordance with manufacturer’s instructions.
5-202.13 Backflow Prevention, Air Gap.
An air gap between the water supply inlet and the flood level rim of the plumbing fixture, equipment, or nonfood equipment
shall be at least twice the diameter of the water supply inlet and may not be less than 25 mm (1 inch).P
5-202.14 Backflow Prevention Device, Design Standard.
A backflow or backsiphonage prevention device installed on a water supply system shall meet American Society of Sanitary
Engineering (A.S.S.E.) standards for construction, installation, maintenance, inspection, and testing for that specific
application and type of device.P
5-202.15 Conditioning Device, Design.
A water filter, screen, and other water conditioning device installed on water lines shall be designed to facilitate disassembly
for periodic servicing and cleaning. A water filter element shall be of the replaceable type.
5-203.11 Handwashing Facilities.
(A) Except as specified in ¶¶ (B), (C), (D) and (E) of this section, at least 1 handwashing sink or the number of handwashing
sinks necessary for their convenient use by employees in areas specified under § 5-204.11, shall be provided. Food
establishments opened prior to July 1, 1965 are exempt from this requirement provided that employees can meet the
requirements under §§ 2-301.12 and 2-301.13.Pf
(B) If approved and capable of removing the types of soils encountered in the food operations involved, automatic
handwashing facilities may be substituted for handwashing sinks in a food establishment that has at least one handwashing
sink.
(C) An adequate number of handwashing stations shall be provided for each temporary food establishment to include:
(1) A minimum of one enclosed container that has a minimum water capacity of five gallons;Pf
(2) A spigot that can be opened to provide a constant flow of water;Pf
(3) Soap;Pf
(4) Water;Pf
(5) Paper towels;Pf and
(6) A collection container for wastewater with a minimum capacity of five gallons.Pf
(D) Class II, III and IV mobile food units must provide a handwashing sink;
65
(E) Outdoor cooking and beverage dispensing operations must be equipped with or located adjacent to a plumbed
handwashing sink. Outdoor cooking and beverage dispensing operations that are not permanently constructed may provide a
handwashing system that meets the requirements of paragraph 5-203.11(C) if approved by the regulatory authority.Pf
5-203.12 Toilets and Urinals.
(A) Except as specified in ¶ (B) of this section, toilet facilities shall be installed according to ORS 455.010 through 455.895
(2010 Oregon Structure Specialty Code) for the number of toilets.Pf
(B) Food establishments with occupancy of 15 or less to include both employees and patrons may have only one toilet fixture
and adjacent sink on the premises.
(C) Mobile food units shall provide toilet facilities as provided for in § 6-402.11.Pf
5-203.13 Service Sink.
(A) At least 1 service sink or 1 curbed cleaning facility equipped with a floor drain shall be provided and conveniently
located for the cleaning of mops or similar wet floor cleaning tools and for the disposal of mop water and similar liquid
waste.
(B) Toilets and urinals may not be used as a service sink for the disposal of mop water and similar liquid waste.
(C) For mobile food units, if wet mopping is used as a method for cleaning the floor, then a separate sink must be provided in
the unit for cleaning mops and cleaning tools and for the disposal of mop water or similar liquid wastes.
5-203.14 Backflow Prevention Device, When Required.
A plumbing system shall be installed to preclude backflow of a solid, liquid, or gas contaminant into the water supply system
at each point of use at the food establishment, including on a hose bibb if a hose is attached or on a hose bibb if a hose is not
attached and backflow prevention is required by law, by:
(A) Providing an air gap as specified under § 5-202.13;P or
(B) Installing an approved backflow prevention device as specified under § 5-202.14.P
5-203.15 Backflow Prevention Device, Carbonator.
(A) If not provided with an air gap as specified under § 5-202.13, a dual check valve with an intermediate vent preceded by a
screen of not less than 100 mesh to 25.4 mm (100 mesh to 1 inch) shall be installed upstream from a carbonating device and
downstream from any copper in the water supply line.P
(B) A dual check valve attached to the carbonator need not be of the vented type if an air gap or vented backflow prevention
device has been otherwise provided as specified under ¶ (A) of this section.
5-204.11 Handwashing Facilities.
A handwashing facility shall be located:
(A) To allow convenient use by employees in food preparation, food dispensing, and warewashing areas;Pf and
(B) In, or immediately adjacent to, toilet rooms.Pf
5-204.12 Backflow Prevention Device, Location.
A backflow prevention device shall be located so that it may be serviced and maintained.
5-204.13 Conditioning Device, Location.
A water filter, screen, and other water conditioning device installed on water lines shall be located to facilitate disassembly
for periodic servicing and cleaning.
5-205.11 Using a Handwashing Facility.
(A) A handwashing facility shall be maintained so that it is accessible at all times for employee use.Pf
(B) A handwashing facility may not be used for purposes other than handwashing. Pf
(C) An automatic handwashing facility shall be used in accordance with manufacturer’s instructions.Pf
66
5-205.12 Prohibiting a Cross Connection.
(A) A person may not create a cross connection by connecting a pipe or conduit between the drinking water system and a
nondrinking water system or a water system of unknown quality.P
(B) The piping of a nondrinking water system shall be durably identified so that it is readily distinguishable from piping that
carries drinking water.Pf
5-205.13 Scheduling Inspection and Service for a Water System Device.
A device such as a water treatment device or backflow preventer shall be scheduled for inspection and service, in accordance
with manufacturer's instructions and as necessary to prevent device failure based on local water conditions, and records
demonstrating inspection and service shall be maintained by the person in charge.Pf
5-205.14 Water Reservoir of Fogging Devices, Cleaning.
(A) A reservoir that is used to supply water to a device such as a produce fogger shall be:
(1) Maintained in accordance with manufacturer's specifications; P and
(2) Cleaned in accordance with manufacturer's specifications or according to the procedures specified under ¶ (B) of this
section, whichever is more stringent. P
(B) Cleaning procedures shall include at least the following steps and shall be conducted at least once a week:
(1) Draining and complete disassembly of the water and aerosol contact parts; P
(2) Brush-cleaning the reservoir, aerosol tubing, and discharge nozzles with a suitable detergent solution; P
(3) Flushing the complete system with water to remove the detergent solution and particulate accumulation; P and
(4) Rinsing by immersing, spraying, or swabbing the reservoir, aerosol tubing, and discharge nozzles with at least 50
mg/L hypochlorite solution. P
5-205.15 System Maintained in Good Repair.
A plumbing system shall be:
(A) Repaired according to law;P and
(B) Maintained in good repair.
5-3 MOBILE WATER TANK AND MOBILE FOOD ESTABLISHMENT WATER TANK
Subparts 5-301 Materials
5-302 Design and Construction
5-303 Numbers and Capacities
5-304 Operation and Maintenance
5-305 Water System Requirements
5-301.11 Approved.
Materials that are used in the construction of a mobile water tank, Mobile food unit water tank, and appurtenances shall be:
(A) Safe;P
(B) Durable, corrosion-resistant, and nonabsorbent; and
(C) Finished to have a smooth, easily cleanable surface.
5-302.11 Enclosed System, Sloped to Drain.
A mobile water tank shall be:
(A) Enclosed from the filling inlet to the discharge outlet; and
(B) Sloped to an outlet that allows complete drainage of the tank.
5-302.12 Inspection and Cleaning Port, Protected and Secured.
If a water tank is designed with an access port for inspection and cleaning, the opening shall be in the top of the tank and:
(A) Flanged upward at least 13 mm (one-half inch); and
(B) Equipped with a port cover assembly that is:
(1) Provided with a gasket and a device for securing the cover in place, and
(2) Flanged to overlap the opening and sloped to drain.
67
5-302.13 "V" Type Threads, Use Limitation.
A fitting with "V" type threads on a water tank inlet or outlet shall be allowed only when a hose is permanently attached.
5-302.14 Tank Vent, Protected.
If provided, a water tank vent shall terminate in a downward direction and shall be covered with:
(A) 16 mesh to 25.4 mm (16 mesh to 1 inch) screen or equivalent when the vent is in a protected area; or
(B) A protective filter when the vent is in an area that is not protected from windblown dirt and debris.
5-302.15 Inlet and Outlet, Sloped to Drain.
(A) A water tank and its inlet and outlet shall be sloped to drain.
(B) A water tank inlet shall be positioned so that it is protected from contaminants such as waste discharge, road dust, oil, or
grease.
5-302.16 Hose, Construction and Identification.
A food grade hose shall be used for conveying drinking water from a water tank and shall be:
(A) Safe;P
(B) Durable, corrosion-resistant, and nonabsorbent;
(C) Resistant to pitting, chipping, crazing, scratching, scoring, distortion, and decomposition;
(D) Finished with a smooth interior surface; and
(E) Clearly and durably identified as to its use if not permanently attached.
5-303.11 Filter, Compressed Air.
A filter that does not pass oil or oil vapors shall be installed in the air supply line between the compressor and drinking water
system when compressed air is used to pressurize the water tank system. P
5-303.12 Protective Cover or Device.
A cap and keeper chain, closed cabinet, closed storage tube, or other approved protective cover or device shall be provided
for a water inlet, outlet, and hose.
5-303.13 Mobile Food Establishment Tank Inlet.
A mobile food establishment's water tank inlet shall be:
(A) 19.1 mm (three-fourths inch) in inner diameter or less; and
(B) Provided with a hose connection of a size or type that will prevent its use for any other service.
5-304.11 System Flushing and Sanitization.
A water tank, pump, and hoses shall be flushed and sanitized before being placed in service after construction, repair,
modification, and periods of nonuse.P
5-304.12 Using a Pump and Hoses, Backflow Prevention.
A person shall operate a water tank, pump, and hoses so that backflow and other contamination of the water supply are
prevented.
5-304.13 Protecting Inlet, Outlet, and Hose Fitting.
If not in use, a water tank and hose inlet and outlet fitting shall be protected using a cover or device as specified under §
5-303.12.
5-304.14 Tank, Pump, and Hoses, Dedication.
(A) Except as specified in ¶ (B) of this section, a water tank, pump, and hoses used for conveying drinking water shall be
used for no other purpose.P
(B) Water tanks, pumps, and hoses approved for liquid foods may be used for conveying drinking water if they are cleaned
and sanitized before they are used to convey water.
68
5-304.15 Water Tank Cleaning.
(A) The potable water tanks of a mobile food unit shall be designed to be accessible and translucent so that the
cleanliness can be determined though a visual inspection. Mobile food units licensed prior to February 1, 2020 do
not have to meet this requirement.
(B) The potable and waste water tanks must be cleaned at least every six months or as recommended by the
manufacturer.
5-305.11 Water System Requirements.
(A) A Class IV mobile food unit must have a potable water system of sufficient capacity to furnish enough hot and cold water
for food preparation, warewashing, and handwashing, and the requirements of these rules. This supply must consist of a
minimum of five gallons of water for handwashing and 30 gallons or twice the volume of the three-compartment sink,
whichever is greater, of water for warewashing.P
(B) Class II and III mobile food units must have a water supply that provides sufficient water for food preparation,
handwashing, warewashing or any other requirements as set forth in these rules. If warewashing is conducted on the unit, a
minimum of 30 gallons or twice the volume of the three-compartment sink, whichever is greater, of water must be dedicated
for this purpose. A minimum of five gallons of water must be provided for handwashing.P
(C) All mobile food units must be designed with integral potable and waste water tanks on board the unit. A mobile unit may
connect to water and sewer if it is available at the operating location, however, the tanks must remain on the unit at all times.
A mobile food unit may not connect to a fresh water system without also connecting to an approved sewer system. A mobile
food unit licensed prior to February 1, 2020 in which the water tanks and associated plumbing have been removed prior to
that date is not required to reinstall the water system if the unit is connected to an approved water and sewer system.Pf
(D) Mobile food units that utilize potable and waste water storage tanks that are not integral to the unit must discontinue the
use of these tanks by January 1, 2023.Pf
(E) When calculating the potable water supply tank capacity as required in this section, the volume of the hot
water heater may not be included.
(F) All sinks must provide water under pressure of at least 20 PSI or provide for a continuous flow and may not use
gravity as the sole means to create the pressure. Units licensed prior to February 1, 2020 are not required to meet
this standard if hands can be effectively washed as required.Pf
5-4 SEWAGE, OTHER LIQUID WASTE, AND RAINWATER
Subparts 5-401 Mobile Holding Tank
5-402 Retention, Drainage, and Delivery
5-403 Disposal Facility
5-401.11 Capacity and Drainage.
A sewage holding tank in a mobile food establishment shall be:
(A) Sized 15 percent larger in capacity than the water supply tank; and
(B) Sloped to a drain that is 25 mm (1 inch) in inner diameter or greater, equipped with a shut-off valve.
(C) For a mobile food unit selling only beverages, such as coffee, espresso, or soda, and where most of the potable water
supply is used in the product, the waste water retention tank may be at least one half the volume of the potable water storage
tank. This determination must be made by the regulatory authority.
5-402.10 Establishment Drainage System.
Food establishment drainage systems, including grease traps, that convey sewage shall be designed and installed as specified
under ¶ 5-202.11(A).
5-402.11 Backflow Prevention.
(A) Except as specified in ¶¶ (B), (C), and (D) of this section, a direct connection may not exist between the sewage system
and a drain originating from equipment in which food, portable equipment, or utensils are placed. P
(B) Paragraph (A) of this section does not apply to floor drains that originate in refrigerated spaces that are constructed as
an integral part of the building.
(C) If allowed by law, a warewashing machine may have a direct connection between its waste outlet and a floor drain when
the machine is located within 1.5 m (5 feet) of a trapped floor drain and the machine outlet is connected to the inlet side of a
properly vented floor drain trap.
(D) If allowed by law, a warewashing or culinary sink may have a direct connection.
69
5-402.12 Grease Trap.
If used, a grease trap shall be located to be easily accessible for cleaning.
5-402.13 Conveying Sewage.
Sewage shall be conveyed to the point of disposal through an approved sanitary sewage system or other system, including use
of sewage transport vehicles, waste retention tanks, pumps, pipes, hoses, and connections that are constructed, maintained,
and operated according to law.P
5-402.14 Removing Mobile Food Establishment Wastes.
Sewage and other liquid wastes shall be removed from a mobile food establishment at an approved waste servicing area or by
a sewage transport vehicle in such a way that a public health hazard or nuisance is not created.Pf
(A) Mobile food units that generate only gray water liquid wastes may hand-carry those wastes to a specific disposal location
approved by the regulatory authority.
(B) The waste transport container must be designed and intended to hold and transport gray water without leaks or spills and
have a capacity no greater than 20 gallons.Pf
5-402.15 Flushing a Waste Retention Tank.
A tank for liquid waste retention shall be thoroughly flushed and drained in a sanitary manner during the servicing operation.
5-403.11 Approved Sewage Disposal System.
Sewage shall be disposed through an approved facility that is:
(A) A public sewage treatment plant;P or
(B) An individual sewage disposal system that is sized, constructed, maintained, and operated according to law.P
5-403.12 Other Liquid Wastes and Rainwater.
Condensate drainage and other nonsewage liquids and rainwater shall be drained from point of discharge to disposal
according to law.
5-5 REFUSE, RECYCLABLES, AND RETURNABLES
Subparts 5-501 Facilities on the Premises
5-502 Removal
5-503 Facilities for Disposal and Recycling
5-501.10 Indoor Storage Area.
If located within the food establishment, a storage area for refuse, recyclables, and returnables shall meet the requirements
specified under §§ 6-101.11, 6-201.11 - 6-201.18, 6-202.15, and 6-202.16.
5-501.11 Outdoor Storage Surface.
An outdoor storage surface for refuse, recyclables, and returnables shall be constructed of nonabsorbent material such as
concrete or asphalt and shall be smooth, durable, and sloped to drain.
5-501.12 Outdoor Enclosure.
If used, an outdoor enclosure for refuse, recyclables, and returnables shall be constructed of durable and cleanable materials.
5-501.13 Receptacles.
(A) Except as specified in ¶ (B) of this section, receptacles and waste handling units for refuse, recyclables, and returnables
and for use with materials containing food residue shall be durable, cleanable, insect- and rodent-resistant, leakproof, and
nonabsorbent.
(B) Plastic bags and wet strength paper bags may be used to line receptacles for storage inside the food establishment, or
within closed outside receptacles.
5-501.14 Receptacles in Vending Machines.
Except for a receptacle for beverage bottle crown closures, a refuse receptacle may not be located within a vending machine,
70
5-501.15 Outside Receptacles.
(A) Receptacles and waste handling units for refuse, recyclables, and returnables used with materials containing food residue
and used outside the food establishment shall be designed and constructed to have tight-fitting lids, doors, or covers.
(B) Receptacles and waste handling units for refuse and recyclables such as an on-site compactor shall be installed so that
accumulation of debris and insect and rodent attraction and harborage are minimized and effective cleaning is facilitated
around and, if the unit is not installed flush with the base pad, under the unit.
5-501.16 Storage Areas, Rooms, and Receptacles, Capacity and Availability.
(A) An inside storage room and area and outside storage area and enclosure, and receptacles shall be of sufficient capacity to
hold refuse, recyclables, and returnables that accumulate.
(B) A receptacle shall be provided in each area of the food establishment or premises where refuse is generated or commonly
discarded, or where recyclables or returnables are placed.
(C) If disposable towels are used at handwashing lavatories, a waste receptacle shall be located at each sink or group of
adjacent lavatories.
5-501.17 Toilet Room Receptacle, Covered.
A toilet room used by females shall be provided with a covered receptacle for sanitary napkins.
5-501.18 Cleaning Implements and Supplies.
(A) Except as specified in ¶ (B) of this section, suitable cleaning implements and supplies such as high pressure pumps, hot
water, steam, and detergent shall be provided as necessary for effective cleaning of receptacles and waste handling units for
refuse, recyclables, and returnables.
(B) If approved, off-premises-based cleaning services may be used if on-premises cleaning implements and supplies are not
provided.
5-501.19 Storage Areas, Redeeming Machines, Receptacles and Waste Handling Units,
Location.
(A) An area designated for refuse, recyclables, returnables, and, except as specified in ¶ (B) of this section, a redeeming
machine for recyclables or returnables shall be located so that it is separate from food, equipment, utensils, linens, and single-
service and single-use articles and a public health hazard or nuisance is not created.
(B) A redeeming machine may be located in the packaged food storage area or consumer area of a food establishment if
food, equipment, utensils, linens, and single-service and single-use articles are not subject to contamination from the
machines and a public health hazard or nuisance is not created.
(C) The location of receptacles and waste handling units for refuse, recyclables, and returnables may not create a public
health hazard or nuisance or interfere with the cleaning of adjacent space.
5-501.110 Storing Refuse, Recyclables, and Returnables.
Refuse, recyclables, and returnables shall be stored in receptacles or waste handling units so that they are inaccessible to
insects and rodents.
5-501.111 Areas, Enclosures, and Receptacles, Good Repair.
Storage areas, enclosures, and receptacles for refuse, recyclables, and returnables shall be maintained in good repair.
5-501.112 Outside Storage Prohibitions.
(A) Except as specified in ¶ (B) of this section, refuse receptacles not meeting the requirements specified under ¶
5-501.13(A) such as receptacles that are not rodent-resistant, unprotected plastic bags and paper bags, or baled units that
contain materials with food residue may not be stored outside.
(B) Cardboard or other packaging material that does not contain food residues and that is awaiting regularly scheduled
delivery to a recycling or disposal site may be stored outside without being in a covered receptacle if it is stored so that it
does not create a rodent harborage problem.
71
5-501.113 Covering Receptacles.
Receptacles and waste handling units for refuse, recyclables, and returnables shall be kept covered:
(A) Inside the food establishment if the receptacles and units:
(1) Contain food residue and are not in continuous use; or
(2) After they are filled; and
(B) With tight-fitting lids or doors if kept outside the food establishment.
5-501.114 Using Drain Plugs.
Drains in receptacles and waste handling units for refuse, recyclables, and returnables shall have drain plugs in place.
5-501.115 Maintaining Refuse Areas and Enclosures.
A storage area and enclosure for refuse, recyclables, or returnables shall be maintained free of unnecessary items, as
specified under § 6-501.114, and clean.
5-501.116 Cleaning Receptacles.
(A) Receptacles and waste handling units for refuse, recyclables, and returnables shall be thoroughly cleaned in a way that
does not contaminate food, equipment, utensils, linens, or single-service and single-use articles, and waste water shall be
disposed of as specified under § 5-402.13.
(B) Soiled receptacles and waste handling units for refuse, recyclables, and returnables shall be cleaned at a frequency
necessary to prevent them from developing a buildup of soil or becoming attractants for insects and rodents.
5-502.11 Frequency.
Refuse, recyclables, and returnables shall be removed from the premises at a frequency that will minimize the development
of objectionable odors and other conditions that attract or harbor insects and rodents.
5-502.12 Receptacles or Vehicles.
Refuse, recyclables, and returnables shall be removed from the premises by way of:
(A) Portable receptacles that are constructed and maintained according to law; or
(B) A transport vehicle that is constructed, maintained, and operated according to law.
5-503.11 Community or Individual Facility.
Solid waste not disposed of through the sewage system such as through grinders and pulpers shall be recycled or disposed of
in an approved public or private community recycling or refuse facility; or solid waste shall be disposed of in an individual
refuse facility such as a landfill or incinerator which is sized, constructed, maintained, and operated according to law.
72
Chapter 6
Physical Facilities
Parts
6-1 MATERIALS FOR CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR
6-2 DESIGN, CONSTRUCTION, AND INSTALLATION
6-3 NUMBERS AND CAPACITIES
6-4 LOCATION AND PLACEMENT
6-5 MAINTENANCE AND OPERATION
6-1 MATERIALS FOR CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR
Subparts 6-101 Indoor Areas
6-102 Outdoor Areas
6-101.11 Surface Characteristics.
(A) Except as specified in ¶ (B) of this section, materials for indoor floor, wall, and ceiling surfaces under conditions of
normal use shall be:
(1) Smooth, durable, and easily cleanable for areas where food establishment operations are conducted;
(2) Closely woven and easily cleanable carpet for carpeted areas; and
(3) Nonabsorbent for areas subject to moisture such as food preparation areas, walk-in refrigerators, warewashing areas,
toilet rooms, mobile food establishment servicing areas, and areas subject to flushing or spray cleaning methods.
(B) In a temporary food establishment:
(1) If graded to drain, a floor may be concrete, machine-laid asphalt, or dirt or gravel if it is covered with mats,
removable platforms, duckboards, or other suitable approved materials that are effectively treated to control dust and
mud; and
(2) Walls and ceilings may be constructed of a material that protects the interior from the weather and windblown dust
and debris. Benevolent meal sites as defined in 1-201.10(B) are exempt from the requirement to provide ceilings or
overhead protection.
6-102.11 Surface Characteristics.
(A) The outdoor walking and driving areas shall be surfaced with concrete, asphalt, or gravel or other materials that have
been effectively treated to minimize dust, facilitate maintenance, and prevent muddy conditions.
(B) Exterior surfaces of buildings and mobile food establishments shall be of weather-resistant materials and shall comply
with law.
(C) Outdoor storage areas for refuse, recyclables, or returnables shall be of materials specified under §§ 5-501.11 and
5-501.12.
6-2 DESIGN, CONSTRUCTION, AND INSTALLATION
Subparts 6-201 Cleanability
6-202 Functionality
6-201.11 Floors, Walls, and Ceilings.
Except as specified under § 6-201.14, and except for anti-slip floor coverings or applications that may be used for safety
reasons, floors, floor coverings, walls, wall coverings, and ceilings shall be designed, constructed, and installed so they are
smooth and easily cleanable,
6-201.12 Floors, Walls, and Ceilings, Utility Lines.
(A) Utility service lines and pipes may not be unnecessarily exposed.
(B) Exposed utility service lines and pipes shall be installed so they do not obstruct or prevent cleaning of the floors, walls, or
ceilings.
(C) Exposed horizontal utility service lines and pipes may not be installed on the floor.
73
6-201.13 Floor and Wall Junctures, Coved, and Enclosed or Sealed.
(A) In food establishments in which cleaning methods other than water flushing are used for cleaning floors, the floor and
wall junctures shall be coved and closed to no larger than 1 mm (one thirty-second inch).
(B) The floors in food establishments in which water flush cleaning methods are used shall be provided with drains and be
graded to drain, and the floor and wall junctures shall be coved and sealed.
6-201.14 Floor Carpeting, Restrictions and Installation.
(A) A floor covering such as carpeting or similar material may not be installed as a floor covering in food preparation areas,
walk-in refrigerators, warewashing areas, toilet room areas where handwashing lavatories, toilets, and urinals are located,
refuse storage rooms, or other areas where the floor is subject to moisture, flushing, or spray cleaning methods.
(B) If carpeting is installed as a floor covering in areas other than those specified under ¶ (A) of this section, it shall be:
(1) Securely attached to the floor with a durable mastic, by using a stretch and tack method, or by another method; and
(2) Installed tightly against the wall under the coving or installed away from the wall with a space between the carpet
and the wall and with the edges of the carpet secured by metal stripping or some other means.
6-201.15 Floor Covering, Mats and Duckboards.
Mats and duckboards shall be designed to be removable and easily cleanable.
6-201.16 Wall and Ceiling Coverings and Coatings.
(A) Wall and ceiling covering materials shall be attached so that they are easily cleanable.
(B) Except in areas used only for dry storage, concrete, porous blocks, or bricks used for indoor wall construction shall be
finished and sealed to provide a smooth, nonabsorbent, easily cleanable surface.
6-201.17 Walls and Ceilings, Attachments.
(A) Except as specified in ¶ (B) of this section, attachments to walls and ceilings such as light fixtures, mechanical room
ventilation system components, vent covers, wall mounted fans, decorative items, and other attachments shall be easily
cleanable.
(B) In a consumer area, wall and ceiling surfaces and decorative items and attachments that are provided for ambiance need
not meet this requirement if they are kept clean.
6-201.18 Walls and Ceilings, Studs, Joists, and Rafters.
Except for temporary food establishments, studs, joists, and rafters may not be exposed in areas subject to moisture.
6-202.11 Light Bulbs, Protective Shielding.
(A) Except as specified in ¶ (B) of this section, light bulbs shall be shielded, coated, or otherwise shatter-resistant in areas
where there is exposed food; clean equipment, utensils, and linens; or unwrapped single-service and single-use articles.
(B) Shielded, coated, or otherwise shatter-resistant bulbs need not be used in areas used only for storing food in unopened
packages, if:
(1) The integrity of the packages cannot be affected by broken glass falling onto them; and
(2) The packages are capable of being cleaned of debris from broken bulbs before the packages are opened.
(C) An infrared or other heat lamp shall be protected against breakage by a shield surrounding and extending beyond the bulb
so that only the face of the bulb is exposed.
6-202.12 Heating, Ventilating, Air Conditioning System Vents.
Heating, ventilating, and air conditioning systems shall be designed and installed so that make-up air intake and exhaust vents
do not cause contamination of food, food-contact surfaces, equipment, or utensils.
6-202.13 Insect Control Devices, Design and Installation.
(A) Insect control devices that are used to electrocute or stun flying insects shall be designed to retain the insect within the
device.
(B) Insect control devices shall be installed so that:
(1) The devices are not located over a food preparation area; and
(2) Dead insects and insect fragments are prevented from being impelled onto or falling on exposed food; clean
equipment, utensils, and linens; and unwrapped single-service and single-use articles.
74
6-202.14 Toilet Rooms, Enclosed.
Except where a toilet room is located outside a food establishment and does not open directly into the food establishment
such as a toilet room that is provided by the management of a shopping mall, a toilet room located on the premises shall be
completely enclosed and provided with a tight-fitting and self-closing door.
6-202.15 Outer Openings, Protected.
(A) Except as specified in ¶¶ (B), (C), and (E) and under ¶ (D) of this section, outer openings of a food establishment shall be
protected against the entry of insects and rodents by:
(1) Filling or closing holes and other gaps along floors, walls, and ceilings;
(2) Closed, tight-fitting windows; and
(3) Solid, self-closing, tight-fitting doors.
(B) Paragraph (A) of this section does not apply if a food establishment opens into a larger structure, such as a mall, airport,
or office building, or into an attached structure, such as a porch, and the outer openings from the larger or attached
structure are protected against the entry of insects and rodents.
(C) Exterior doors used as exits need not be self-closing if they are:
(1) Solid and tight-fitting;
(2) Designated for use only when an emergency exists, by the fire protection authority that has jurisdiction over the food
establishment; and
(3) Limited-use so they are not used for entrance or exit from the building for purposes other than the designated
emergency exit use.
(D) Except as specified in ¶¶ (B) and (E) of this section, if the windows or doors of a food establishment, or of a larger
structure within which a food establishment is located, are kept open for ventilation or other purposes or a temporary food
establishment is not provided with windows and doors as specified under ¶ (A) of this section, the openings shall be protected
against the entry of insects and rodents by:
(1) 16 mesh to 25.4 mm (16 mesh to 1 inch) screens;
(2) Properly designed and installed air curtains to control flying insects; or
(3) Other effective means.
(E) Paragraph (D) of section 6-202.15 does not apply:
(1) If flying insects or other pests are absent due to the location of the establishment, the weather, or other limiting
condition; and
(2) The establishment develops a pest management plan to control the presence of flying insects or other pests. The pest
management plan must be approved by the regulatory authority prior to implementation.Pf
6-202.16 Exterior Walls and Roofs, Protective Barrier.
Perimeter walls and roofs of a food establishment shall effectively protect the establishment from the weather and the entry of
insects, rodents, and other animals.
6-202.17 Outdoor Food Vending Areas, Overhead Protection.
Except for machines that vend canned beverages, if located outside, a machine used to vend food shall be provided with
overhead protection.
6-202.18 Outdoor Servicing Areas, Overhead Protection.
Except for areas used only for the loading of water or the discharge of sewage and other liquid waste, through the use of a
closed system of hoses, servicing areas shall be provided with overhead protection.
6-202.19 Outdoor Walking and Driving Surfaces, Graded to Drain.
Exterior walking and driving surfaces shall be graded to drain if required by law.
6-202.110 Outdoor Refuse Areas, Curbed and Graded to Drain.
Outdoor refuse areas shall be constructed in accordance with law and shall be designed and maintained to prevent the
accumulation of liquid waste that results from the refuse and from cleaning the area and waste receptacles.
6-202.111 Private Homes and Living or Sleeping Quarters, Use Prohibition.
Except under a domestic kitchen license issued by the Oregon Department of Agriculture, a private home, a room used as
living or sleeping quarters, or an area directly opening into a room used as living or sleeping quarters may not be used for
conducting food establishment operations.P
75
6-202.112 Living or Sleeping Quarters, Separation.
Living or sleeping quarters located on the premises of a food establishment such as those provided for lodging registration
clerks or resident managers shall be separated from rooms and areas used for food establishment operations by complete
partitioning and solid self-closing doors.
6.3 NUMBERS AND CAPACITIES
Subparts 6-301 Handwashing Sinks
6-302 Toilets and Urinals
6-303 Lighting
6-304 Ventilation
6-305 Dressing Areas and Lockers
6-306 Service Sinks
6-301.10 Minimum Number.
Handwashing facilities shall be provided as specified under § 5-203.11.
6-301.11 Handwashing Cleanser, Availability.
Each handwashing sink or group of 2 adjacent handwashing sinks shall be provided with a supply of hand cleaning liquid,
powder, or bar soap. Pf
6-301.12 Hand Drying Provision.
Each handwashing sink or group of adjacent handwashing sinks shall be provided with:
(A) Individual, disposable towels; Pf
(B) A continuous towel system that supplies the user with a clean towel; Pf or
(C) A heated-air hand drying device; Pf or
(D) A hand drying device that employs an air-knife system that delivers high velocity, pressurized air at ambient
temperatures. Pf
6-301.13 Handwashing Aids and Devices, Use Restrictions.
A sink used for food preparation or utensil washing, or a service sink or curbed cleaning facility used for the disposal of mop
water or similar wastes, may not be provided with the handwashing aids and devices required for a handwashing sink as
specified under §§ 6-301.11 and 6-301.12 and ¶ 5-501.16(C).
6-301.14 Handwashing Signage.
A sign or poster that notifies food employees to wash their hands shall be provided at all handwashing sinks used by food
employees and shall be clearly visible to food employees.
6-301.20 Disposable Towels, Waste Receptacle.
A handwashing sink or group of adjacent handwashing sinks that is provided with disposable towels shall be provided with a
waste receptacle as specified under ¶ 5-501.16(C).
6-302.10 Minimum Number.
Toilets and urinals shall be provided as specified under § 5-203.12.
6-302.11 Toilet Tissue, Availability.
A supply of toilet tissue shall be available at each toilet. Pf
6-303.11 Intensity.
The light intensity shall be:
(A) At least 108 lux (10 foot candles) at a distance of 75 cm (30 inches) above the floor, in walk-in refrigeration units and dry
food storage areas and in other areas and rooms during periods of cleaning;
76
(B) At least 215 lux (20 foot candles):
(1) At a surface where food is provided for consumer self-service such as buffets and salad bars or where fresh produce
or packaged foods are sold or offered for consumption,
(2) Inside equipment such as reach-in and under-counter refrigerators; and
(3) At a distance of 75 cm (30 inches) above the floor in areas used for handwashing, warewashing, and equipment and
utensil storage, and in toilet rooms; and
(C) At least 540 lux (50 foot candles) at a surface where a food employee is working with food or working with utensils or
equipment such as knives, slicers, grinders, or saws where employee safety is a factor.
6-304.11 Mechanical.
If necessary to keep rooms free of excessive heat, steam, condensation, vapors, obnoxious odors, smoke, and fumes,
mechanical ventilation of sufficient capacity shall be provided. For mobile food units, violations of this section shall be
considered a priority foundation item.
6-305.11 Designation.
(A) Dressing rooms or dressing areas shall be designated if employees routinely change their clothes in the establishment.
(B) Lockers or other suitable facilities shall be provided for the orderly storage of employees' clothing and other possessions.
6-306.10 Availability.
A service sink or curbed cleaning facility shall be provided as specified under § 5-203.13(A).
6-4 LOCATION AND PLACEMENT
Subparts 6-401 Handwashing Sinks
6-402 Toilet Rooms
6-403 Employee Accommodations
6-404 Distressed Merchandise
6-405 Refuse, Recyclables, and Returnables
6-401.10 Conveniently Located.
Handwashing sinks shall be conveniently located as specified under § 5-204.11.
6-402.11 Convenience and Accessibility.
(A) Except for ¶¶ (B) through (F) of this section, toilet rooms shall be conveniently located and accessible to employees
during all hours of operation and shall be an integral part of the building.
(B) A food service establishment may be approved without an integral toilet room under the following conditions:
(1) An integral toilet room is not required by law; and
(2) A toilet room is located within 500 feet of the food establishment; and
(3) A written agreement is in place that allows the use of the toilet room; or
(4) The food service establishment is located in an outdoor mall or shopping center.
(C) Toilet facilities for the customer are required only in establishments constructed or extensively remodeled after May 11,
1974,
(D) Food establishments limited to drive-in or handout service are not required to provide toilet rooms facilities for the
customer.
(E) For mobile food units:
(1) On board toilet facilities are not applicable to most mobile food units. If the unit is not so equipped, then the mobile
food unit must operate within one-quarter mile or a five-minute walk of an accessible restroom facility. New mobile
food units first licensed on or after February 1, 2020 must be located within 500 feet of an accessible restroom. Mobile
food units that operate on a designated route, that do not stop at a fixed location for more than two hours during the
workday or are operating in conjunction with an event are be exempt from this subparagraph.
(2) Mobile food units that do not provide on board restroom facilities must have restroom facilities that shall be
accessible to employees during all hours of operation. The restroom facilities must have a handwashing system that
meets the requirements of sections 5-202.12, 6-301.11, 6-301.12, 6-301.20 and 6-302.11. Employees may use a
restroom located in a private home or a portable toilet to satisfy this requirement.
77
(F) Food service establishments that are constructed in or adjacent to a single family residence are not required to provide a
separate restroom for employees, if a restroom in the residence is available during all hours of operation. The restroom
facility must meet the requirements of sections 5-202.12, 6-301.11, 6-301.12, 6-301.20 and 6-302.11.
6-403.11 Designated Areas.
(A) Areas designated for employees to eat, drink, and use tobacco shall be located so that food, equipment, linens, and single-
service and single-use articles are protected from contamination.
(B) Lockers or other suitable facilities shall be located in a designated room or area where contamination of food, equipment,
utensils, linens, and single-service and single-use articles cannot occur.
6-404.11 Segregation and Location.
Products that are held by the permit holder for credit, redemption, or return to the distributor, such as damaged, spoiled, or
recalled products, shall be segregated and held in designated areas that are separated from food, equipment, utensils, linens,
and single-service and single-use articles.Pf
6-405.10 Receptacles, Waste Handling Units, and Designated Storage Areas.
Units, receptacles, and areas designated for storage of refuse and recyclable and returnable containers shall be located as
specified under § 5-501.19.
6-5 MAINTENANCE AND OPERATION
Subpart 6-501 Premises, Structures, Attachments, and Fixtures - Methods
6-501.11 Repairing.
Physical facilities shall be maintained in good repair.
6-501.12 Cleaning, Frequency and Restrictions.
(A) Physical facilities shall be cleaned as often as necessary to keep them clean.
(B) Except for cleaning that is necessary due to a spill or other accident, cleaning shall be done during periods when the least
amount of food is exposed such as after closing.
6-501.13 Cleaning Floors, Dustless Methods.
(A) Except as specified in ¶ (B) of this section, only dustless methods of cleaning shall be used, such as wet cleaning,
vacuum cleaning, mopping with treated dust mops, or sweeping using a broom and dust-arresting compounds.
(B) Spills or drippage on floors that occur between normal floor cleaning times may be cleaned:
(1) Without the use of dust-arresting compounds; and
(2) In the case of liquid spills or drippage, with the use of a small amount of absorbent compound such as sawdust or
diatomaceous earth applied immediately before spot cleaning.
6-501.14 Cleaning Ventilation Systems, Nuisance and Discharge Prohibition.
(A) Intake and exhaust air ducts shall be cleaned and filters changed so they are not a source of contamination by dust, dirt,
and other materials.
(B) If vented to the outside, ventilation systems may not create a public health hazard or nuisance or unlawful discharge.
6-501.15 Cleaning Maintenance Tools, Preventing Contamination.
Food preparation sinks, handwashing sinks, and warewashing equipment may not be used for the cleaning of maintenance
tools, the preparation or holding of maintenance materials, or the disposal of mop water and similar liquid wastes.Pf
6-501.16 Drying Mops.
After use, mops shall be placed in a position that allows them to air-dry without soiling walls, equipment, or supplies.
6-501.17 Absorbent Materials on Floors, Use Limitation.
Except as specified in ¶ 6-501.13(B), sawdust, wood shavings, granular salt, baked clay, diatomaceous earth, or similar
materials may not be used on floors.
78
6-501.18 Cleaning of Plumbing Fixtures
Plumbing fixtures such as handwashing sinks, toilets, and urinals shall be cleaning as often as necessary to keep them clean.
6-501.19 Closing Toilet Room Doors.
Except during cleaning and maintenance operations, toilet room doors as specified under § 6-202.14 shall be kept closed.
6-501.110 Using Dressing Rooms and Lockers.
(A) Dressing rooms shall be used by employees if the employees regularly change their clothes in the establishment.
(B) Lockers or other suitable facilities shall be used for the orderly storage of employee clothing and other possessions.
6-501.111 Controlling Pests.
The premises shall be maintained free of insects, rodents, and other pests.Pf The presence of insects, rodents, and other pests
shall be controlled to minimize their presence on the premises by:
(A) Routinely inspecting incoming shipments of food and supplies;
(B) Routinely inspecting the premises for evidence of pests;
(C) Using methods, if pests are found, such as trapping devices or other means of pest control as specified under §§ 7-202.12,
7-206.12, and 7-206.13;Pf and
(D) Eliminating harborage conditions.
6-501.112 Removing Dead or Trapped Birds, Insects, Rodents, and Other Pests.
Dead or trapped birds, insects, rodents, and other pests shall be removed from control devices and the premises at a frequency
that prevents their accumulation, decomposition, or the attraction of pests.
6-501.113 Storing Maintenance Tools.
Maintenance tools such as brooms, mops, vacuum cleaners, and similar items shall be:
(A) Stored so they do not contaminate food, equipment, utensils, linens, and single-service and single-use articles; and
(B) Stored in an orderly manner that facilitates cleaning the area used for storing the maintenance tools.
6-501.114 Maintaining Premises, Unnecessary Items and Litter.
The premises shall be free of:
(A) Items that are unnecessary to the operation or maintenance of the establishment such as equipment that is nonfunctional
or no longer used; and
(B) Litter.
6-501.115 Prohibiting Animals.
(A) Except as specified in ¶ (B), (C), (D) and (E) of this section, live animals may not be allowed on the premises of a food
establishment.Pf
(B) A food establishment shall permit the use of a service animal by an individual with a disability on its premises unless the
service animal poses a direct threat to the health and safety of others.
(1) For purposes of section 6-501.115 the term “direct threat” means a significant risk to the health or safety of others
that cannot be eliminated by modification of policies, practices, or procedures or by provision of auxiliary aids or
services.
(2) In determining whether a service animal poses a direct threat to the health or safety of others, a food establishment
must make an individualized assessment, based on reasonable judgment that relies on the best available objective
evidence, to ascertain: The nature, duration, and severity of the risk; the probability that the potential injury will
actually occur; and whether reasonable modifications of policies, practices, or procedures will mitigate the risk.
(3) A food establishment may ask an individual with a disability to remove a service animal from the premises if:
(a) The animal is out of control and the animal’s handler does not take effective action to control it; or
(b) The animal is not housebroken.
(C) Live animals may be allowed in the following situations if the contamination of food; clean equipment, utensils, and
linens; and unwrapped single-service and single-use articles can not result:
(1) Edible fish or decorative fish in aquariums, shellfish or crustacea on ice or under refrigeration, and shellfish and
crustacean in display tank systems;
(2) Patrol dogs accompanying police or security officers in offices and dining, sales, and storage areas, and sentry dogs
running loose in outside fenced areas;
79
(3) Pets in the common dining areas of group residences at times other than during meals if:
(a) Effective partitioning and self-closing doors separate the commons from food storage or food preparation areas,
(b) Condiments, equipment, and utensils are stored in enclosed cabinets or removed from the common dining areas
when pets are present, and
(c) Dining areas including tables, countertops, and similar surfaces are effectively cleaned before the next meal
service; and
(d) In areas that are not used for food preparation, storage, sales, display, or dining, in which there are caged
animals or animals that are similarly restricted, such as in a variety store that sells pets or a tourist park that
displays animals.
(4) In areas that are not used for food preparation, storage, sales, display, or dining, in which there are caged animals
or animals that are similarly restricted, such as in a variety store that sells pets or a tourist park that displays animals.
(D) Live or dead fish bait may be stored if contamination of food; clean equipment, utensils, and linens; and unwrapped
single-service and single-use articles cannot result.
(E) Pet dogs may be allowed in outside seating areas of a food establishment under the following conditions:
(1) The food establishment prepares written procedures that include:
(a) A diagram of the outdoor area to be designated as available to consumers with pet dogs;Pf
(b) The establishment’s procedure for assuring that employees do not touch, pet or otherwise handle pet dogs and for
immediately cleaning accidents involving dog waste. The procedure must also describe the location of materials and
equipment necessary to clean up accidents involving dog waste;Pf and
(c) The establishment’s procedure for notifying employees and consumers of the requirements of this paragraph.Pf
(2) Pet dogs may not come into contact with serving dishes, utensils and tableware. Pet dogs are also not allowed on
chairs, tables and other furnishings.Pf
(3) Employees and consumers may not provide food to pet dogs.Pf
(4) Pet dogs must be on a leash and under control of the consumer at all times.Pf
(5) At no time may pet dogs be permitted to travel through the indoor or non-designated outdoor portions of the food
establishment.Pf
80
Chapter 7
Poisonous or Toxic Materials
Parts
7-1 LABELING AND IDENTIFICATION
7-2 OPERATIONAL SUPPLIES AND APPLICATIONS
7-3 STOCK AND RETAIL SALE
7-1 LABELING AND IDENTIFICATION
Subparts 7-101 Original Containers
7-102 Working Containers
7-101.11 Identifying Information, Prominence.
Containers of poisonous or toxic materials and personal care items shall bear a legible manufacturer's label.Pf
7-102.11 Common Name.
Working containers used for storing poisonous or toxic materials such as cleaners and sanitizers taken from bulk supplies
shall be clearly and individually identified with the common name of the material.Pf
7-2 OPERATIONAL SUPPLIES AND APPLICATIONS
Subparts 7-201 Storage
7-202 Presence and Use
7-203 Container Prohibitions
7-204 Chemicals
7-205 Lubricants
7-206 Pesticides
7-207 Medicines
7-208 First Aid Supplies
7-209 Other Personal Care Items
7-201.11 Separation.
Poisonous or toxic materials shall be stored so they cannot contaminate food, equipment, utensils, linens, and single-service
and single-use articles by:
(A) Separating the poisonous or toxic materials by spacing or partitioning; P and
(B) Locating the poisonous or toxic materials in an area that is not above food, equipment, utensils, linens, and single-service
or single-use articles. This paragraph does not apply to equipment and utensil cleaners and sanitizers that are stored in
warewashing areas for availability and convenience if the materials are stored to prevent contamination of food, equipment,
utensils, linens, and single-service and single-use articles. P
7-202.11 Restriction.
(A) Only those poisonous or toxic materials that are required for the operation and maintenance of a food establishment, such
as for the cleaning and sanitizing of equipment and utensils and the control of insects and rodents, shall be allowed in a food
establishment.Pf
(B) Paragraph (A) of this section does not apply to packaged poisonous or toxic materials that are for retail sale.
81
7-202.12 Conditions of Use.
Poisonous or toxic materials shall be:
(A) Used according to:
(1) Law and this Code,
(2) Manufacturer's use directions included in labeling, and, for a pesticide, manufacturer's label instructions that state that
use is allowed in a food establishment, P
(3) The conditions of certification, if certification is required, for use of the pest control materials, P and
(4) Additional conditions that may be established by the regulatory authority;P and
(B) Applied so that:
(1) A hazard to employees or other persons is not constituted, P and
(2) Contamination including toxic residues due to drip, drain, fog, splash or spray on food, equipment, utensils, linens,
and single-service and single-use articles is prevented, and for a restricted use pesticide, this is achieved by: P
(a) Removing the items, P
(b) Covering the items with impermeable covers, P or
(c) Taking other appropriate preventive actions, P and
(d) Cleaning and sanitizing equipment and utensils after the application. P
(C) A restricted use pesticide shall be applied only by an applicator certified as defined in 7 USC 136 Definitions, (e)
Certified Applicator, of the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act, or a person under the direct supervision of a
certified applicator. Pf
7-203.11 Poisonous or Toxic Material Containers.
A container previously used to store poisonous or toxic materials may not be used to store, transport, or dispense food.P
7-204.11 Sanitizers, Criteria.
Chemical sanitizers and other chemical antimicrobials applied to food-contact surfaces shall meet the requirements specified
in 40 CFR 180.940 Tolerance exemptions for active and inert ingredients for use in antimicrobial formulations (food-contact
surface sanitizing solutions). P
7-204.12 Chemicals for Washing Fruits and Vegetables, Criteria.
(A) Chemicals used to wash or peel raw, whole fruits and vegetables shall meet the requirements specified in 21 CFR
173.315 Chemicals used in washing or to assist in the peeling of fruits and vegetables. P
(B) Ozone as an antimicrobial agent used in the treatment, storage, and processing of fruits and vegetables in a food
establishment shall meet the requirements specified in 21 CFR 173.368 Ozone.
7-204.13 Boiler Water Additives, Criteria.
Chemicals used as boiler water additives shall meet the requirements specified in 21 CFR 173.310 Boiler Water Additives.P
7-204.14 Drying Agents, Criteria.
Drying agents used in conjunction with sanitization shall:
(A) Contain only components that are listed as one of the following:
(1) Generally recognized as safe for use in food as specified in 21 CFR 182 - Substances Generally Recognized as Safe,
or 21 CFR 184 - Direct Food Substances Affirmed as Generally Recognized as Safe, P
(2) Generally recognized as safe for the intended use as specified in 21 CFR 186 - Indirect Food Substances Affirmed as
Generally Recognized as Safe, P
(3) Approved for use as a drying agent under a prior sanction specified in 21 CFR 181 - Prior-Sanctioned Food
Ingredients, P
(4) Specifically regulated as an indirect food additive for use as a drying agent as specified in 21 CFR Parts 175-178, P or
(5) Approved for use as a drying agent under the threshold of regulation process established by 21 CFR 170.39
Threshold of regulation for substances used in food-contact articles; P and
(B) When sanitization is with chemicals, the approval required under Subparagraph (A)(3) or (A)(5) of this section or the
regulation as an indirect food additive required under Subparagraph (A)(4) of this section, shall be specifically for use with
chemical sanitizing solutions. P
7-205.11 Incidental Food Contact, Criteria.
Lubricants shall meet the requirements specified in 21 CFR 178.3570 Lubricants with incidental food contact, if they are
used on food-contact surfaces, on bearings and gears located on or within food-contact surfaces, or on bearings and gears that
are located so that lubricants may leak, drip, or be forced into food or onto food-contact surfaces.P
82
7-206.11 Restricted Use Pesticides, Criteria.
Restricted use pesticides specified under ¶ 7-202.12(C) shall meet the requirements specified in 40 CFR 152 Subpart I -
Classification of Pesticides.P
7-206.12 Rodent Bait Stations.
Rodent bait shall be contained in a covered, tamper-resistant bait station. P
7-206.13 Tracking Powders, Pest Control and Monitoring.
(A) Except as specified in ¶ (B) of this section, a tracking powder pesticide may not be used in a food establishment. P
(B) If used, a nontoxic tracking powder such as talcum or flour may not contaminate food, equipment, utensils, linens, and
single-service and single-use articles.
7-207.11 Restriction and Storage.
(A) Except for medicines that are stored or displayed for retail sale, only those medicines that are necessary for the health of
employees shall be allowed in a food establishment. Pf
(B) Medicines that are in a food establishment for the employees' use shall be labeled as specified under § 7-101.11 and
located to prevent the contamination of food, equipment, utensils, linens, and single-service and single-use articles. P
7-207.12 Refrigerated Medicines, Storage.
Medicines belonging to employees or to children in a day care center that require refrigeration and are stored in a food
refrigerator shall be:
(A) Stored in a package or container and kept inside a covered, leakproof container that is identified as a container for the
storage of medicines;P and
(B) Located so they are inaccessible to children. P
7-208.11 Storage.
First aid supplies that are in a food establishment for the employees' use shall be:
(A) Labeled as specified under § 7-101.11;Pf and
(B) Stored in a kit or a container that is located to prevent the contamination of food, equipment, utensils, and linens, and
single-service and single-use articles.P
7-209.11 Storage.
Except as specified under §§ 7-207.12 and 7-208.11, employees shall store their personal care items in facilities as specified
under ¶ 6-305.11(B).
7-3 STOCK AND RETAIL SALE
Subpart 7-301 Storage and Display
7-301.11 Separation.
Poisonous or toxic materials shall be stored and displayed for retail sale so they cannot contaminate food, equipment,
utensils, linens, and single-service and single-use articles by:
(A) Separating the poisonous or toxic materials by spacing or partitioning;P and
(B) Locating the poisonous or toxic materials in an area that is not above food, equipment, utensils, linens, and single-service
or single-use articles.P
83
Chapter 8
Compliance and Enforcement
Parts
8-1 CODE APPLICABILITY
8-2 PLAN SUBMISSION AND APPROVAL
8-3 PERMIT TO OPERATE
8-4 INSPECTION AND CORRECTION OF VIOLATIONS
8-5 PREVENTION OF FOODBORNE DISEASE TRANSMISSION BY EMPLOYEES
8-6 CONSTITUTIONAL PROTECTION
8-7 NOTICES
8-8 REMEDIES
8-1 CODE APPLICABILITY
Subparts 8-101 Use for Intended Purpose
8-102 Additional Requirements
8-103 Variances
8-101.10 Public Health Protection.
(A) The regulatory authority shall apply this Code to promote its underlying purpose, as specified in § 1-102.10, of
safeguarding public health and ensuring that food is safe, unadulterated, and honestly presented when offered to the
consumer.
(B) In enforcing the provisions of this Code, the regulatory authority shall assess existing facilities or equipment that were in
use before the effective date of this Code based on the following considerations:
(1) Whether the facilities or equipment are in good repair and capable of being maintained in a sanitary condition;
(2) Whether food-contact surfaces comply with Subpart 4-101;
(3) Whether the capacities of cooling, heating, and holding equipment are sufficient to comply with  4-301.11; and
(4) The existence of a documented agreement with the permit holder that the facilities or equipment will be replaced as
specified under ¶ 8-304.11(G).
(C) Plans submitted shall be reviewed and commented on by an environmental health specialist registered in accordance with
ORS chapter 700.
8-102.10 Preventing Health Hazards, Provision for Conditions Not Addressed.
(A) If necessary to protect against public health hazards or nuisances, the regulatory authority may impose specific
requirements in addition to the requirements contained in this Code that are authorized by law.
(B) The regulatory authority shall document the conditions that necessitate the imposition of additional requirements and the
underlying public health rationale. The documentation shall be provided to the permit applicant or permit holder and a copy
shall be maintained in the regulatory authority's file for the food establishment.
8-103.10 Modifications and Waivers.
(A) The Department may grant a variance from requirements of this code as follows:
(1) Where it is demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Department that strict compliance with the rule may be highly
burdensome or impractical due to special condition or cause;
(2) Where the public or private interest in the granting of the variance is found by the Department to clearly outweigh
the interest of the application of uniform rules; and
(3) Where such alternative measures are provided which in the opinion of the Department will provide adequate public
health and safety protection.
(B) Such variance authority is not conferred upon any Local Public Health Authority notwithstanding contractual authority in
administration and enforcement of the food service statutes and rules;
(C) The applicant must complete the required application, pay the required fee and include all necessary information to
support the variance request, which may include, but is not limited to, required testing, challenge data and research results;
84
(D) If a variance is granted, the regulatory authority shall retain the information specified under § 8-103.11 in its records for
the food establishment;
(E) The Department shall review variances at least triennially;
(F) Revocation or denial of the variance request shall be subject to the appeal process provided under ORS chapter 183.
8-103.11 Documentation of Proposed Variance and Justification.
Before a variance from a requirement of this Code is approved, the information that shall be provided by the person
requesting the variance and retained in the regulatory authority's file on the food establishment includes:
(A) A statement of the proposed variance of the Code requirement citing relevant Code section numbers;Pf
(B) An analysis of the rationale for how the potential public health hazards and nuisances addressed by the relevant Code
sections will be alternatively addressed by the proposal;Pf and
(C) A HACCP plan if required as specified under ¶ 8-201.13(A) that includes the information specified under § 8-201.14 as it
is relevant to the variance requested.Pf
(D) If required by the regulatory authority, provide documentation that a recognized process authority has reviewed the
variance request and approved the process. Any necessary or required training or documentation must be successfully
completed prior to variance approval.Pf
8-103.12 Conformance with Approved Procedures.
If the regulatory authority grants a variance as specified in § 8-103.10, or a HACCP plan is otherwise required as specified
under § 8-201.13, the permit holder shall:
(A) Comply with the HACCP plans and procedures that are submitted as specified under § 8-201.14 and approved as a basis
for the modification or waiver;P and
(B) Maintain and provide to the regulatory authority, upon request, records specified under ¶¶ 8-201.14(D) and (E) that
demonstrate that the following are routinely employed;
(1) Procedures for monitoring critical control points,Pf
(2) Monitoring of the critical control points,Pf
(3) Verification of the effectiveness of an operation or process,Pf and
(4) Necessary corrective actions if there is failure at a critical control point.Pf
8-2 PLAN SUBMISSION AND APPROVAL
Subparts 8-201 Facility and Operating Plans
8-202 Confidentiality
8-203 Construction Inspection and Approval
8-201.11 When Plans Are Required.
A permit applicant or permit holder shall submit to the regulatory authority properly prepared plans and specifications for
review and approval before:
(A) The construction of a food establishment;Pf
(B) The conversion of an existing structure for use as a food establishment;Pf or
(C) The remodeling of a food establishment or a change of type of food establishment or food operation as specified under ¶
8-302.14(C) if the regulatory authority determines that plans and specifications are necessary to ensure compliance with this
Code.Pf
(D) Notwithstanding paragraphs (A) through (C) of this section, vending machines having the sanitary approval of the
National Automatic Merchandizing Association shall be exempt from the requirement to submit plans for review and
approval.
8-201.12 Contents of the Plans and Specifications.
The plans and specifications for a food establishment, including a food establishment specified under § 8-201.13, shall
include, as required by the regulatory authority based on the type of operation, type of food preparation, and foods prepared,
the following information to demonstrate conformance with Code provisions:
(A) Intended menu;
(B) Anticipated volume of food to be stored, prepared, and sold or served;
(C) Proposed layout, mechanical schematics, construction materials, and finish schedules;
(D) Proposed equipment types, manufacturers, model numbers, locations, dimensions, performance capacities, and
installation specifications;
85
(E) Evidence that standard procedures that ensure compliance with the requirements of this Code are developed or are being
developed; and
(F) Other information that may be required by the regulatory authority for the proper review of the proposed construction,
conversion or modification, and procedures for operating a food establishment.
8-201.13 When a HACCP Plan is Required.
(A) Before engaging in an activity that requires a HACCP plan, a permit applicant or permit holder shall submit to the
regulatory authority for approval a properly prepared HACCP plan as specified under § 8-201.14 and the relevant provisions
of this Code if:
(1) Submission of a HACCP plan is required according to law;
(2) A variance is required as specified under subparagraph 3-401.11(D)(4), section 3-502.11, or paragraph 4-204.110(B);
or
(3) The regulatory authority determines that a food preparation or processing method requires a variance based on a plan
submittal specified under § 8-201.12, an inspectional finding, or a variance request.
(B) A permit applicant or permit holder shall have a properly prepared HACCP plan as specified under § 3-502.12.
8-201.14 Contents of a HACCP Plan.
For a food establishment that is required under § 8-201.13 to have a HACCP plan, the plan and specifications shall indicate:
(A) A categorization of the types of potentially hazardous foods (time/temperature control for safety foods) that are specified
in the menu such as soups and sauces, salads, and bulk, solid foods such as meat roasts, or of other foods that are specified by
the regulatory authority; Pf
(B) A flow diagram by specific food or category type identifying critical control points and providing information on the
following:
(1) Ingredients, materials, and equipment used in the preparation of that food, Pf and
(2) Formulations or recipes that delineate methods and procedural control measures that address the food safety concerns
involved; Pf
(C) Food employee and supervisory training plan that addresses the food safety issues of concern; Pf
(D) A statement of standard operating procedures for the plan under consideration including clearly identifying:
(1) Each critical control point, Pf
(2) The critical limits for each critical control point, Pf
(3) The method and frequency for monitoring and controlling each critical control point by the food employee designated
by the person in charge, Pf
(4) The method and frequency for the person in charge to routinely verify that the food employee is following standard
operating procedures and monitoring critical control points, Pf
(5) Action to be taken by the person in charge if the critical limits for each critical control point are not met, Pf and
(6) Records to be maintained by the person in charge to demonstrate that the HACCP plan is properly operated and
managed; Pf and
(E) Additional scientific data or other information, as required by the regulatory authority, supporting the determination that
food safety is not compromised by the proposal. Pf
8-202.10 Trade Secrets.
The regulatory authority shall treat as confidential in accordance with law, information that meets the criteria specified in law
for a trade secret and is contained on inspection report forms and in the plans and specifications submitted as specified under
§§ 8-201.12 and 8-201.14.
8-203.10 Preoperational Inspections.
The regulatory authority shall conduct one or more preoperational inspections to verify that the food establishment is
constructed and equipped in accordance with the approved plans and approved modifications of those plans, has established
standard operating procedures as specified under ¶ 8-201.12(E), and is in compliance with law and this Code.
86
8-3 PERMIT TO OPERATE
Subparts 8-301 Requirement
8-302 Application Procedure
8-303 Issuance
8-304 Conditions of Retention
8-301.11 Prerequisite for Operation.
A person may not operate a food establishment without a valid permit to operate issued by the regulatory authority.
8-302.11 Submission 30 Calendar Days Before Proposed Opening. [Deleted]
8-302.12 Form of Submission.
A person desiring to operate a food establishment shall submit to the regulatory authority a written application for a permit on
a form provided by the regulatory authority.
8-302.13 Qualifications and Responsibilities of Applicants.
To qualify for a permit, an applicant shall:
(A) Be an owner of the food establishment or an officer of the legal ownership;
(B) Comply with the requirements of this Code;
(C) As specified under § 8-402.11, agree to allow access to the food establishment and to provide required information; and
(D) Pay the applicable permit fees at the time the application is submitted.
8-302.14 Contents of the Application.
The application shall include:
(A) The name, mailing address, telephone number, and signature of the person applying for the permit and the name, mailing
address, and location of the food establishment;
(B) Information specifying whether the food establishment is owned by an association, corporation, individual, partnership,
or other legal entity;
(C) A statement specifying whether the food establishment:
(1) Is mobile or stationary and temporary or permanent, and
(2) Is an operation that includes one or more of the following:
(a) Prepares, offers for sale, or serves potentially hazardous food:
(i) Only to order upon a consumer's request,
(ii) In advance in quantities based on projected consumer demand and discards food that is not sold or served at
an approved frequency, or
(iii) Using time as the public health control as specified under § 3-501.19,
(b) Prepares potentially hazardous food in advance using a food preparation method that involves two or more steps
which may include combining potentially hazardous ingredients; cooking; cooling; reheating; hot or cold holding;
freezing; or thawing,
(c) Prepares food as specified under Subparagraph (C)(2)(b) of this section for delivery to and consumption at a
location off the premises of the food establishment where it is prepared,
(d) Prepares food as specified under Subparagraph (C)(2)(b) of this section for service to a highly susceptible
population,
(e) Prepares only food that is not potentially hazardous, or
(f) Does not prepare, but offers for sale only prepackaged food that is not potentially hazardous;
(D) The name, title, address, and telephone number of the person directly responsible for the food establishment;
(E) [Deleted]
(F) The names, titles, and addresses of:
(1) The persons comprising the legal ownership as specified under ¶ (B) of this section including the owners and
officers, and
(2) The local resident agent if one is required based on the type of legal ownership;
87
(G) A statement signed by the applicant that:
(1) Attests to the accuracy of the information provided in the application, and
(2) Affirms that the applicant will:
(a) Comply with this Code, and
(b) Allow the regulatory authority access to the establishment as specified under § 8-402.11 and to the records
specified under §§ 3-203.12 and 5-205.13 and Subparagraph 8-201.14(D)(6); and
(H) Other information required by the regulatory authority.
8-303.10 New, Converted, or Remodeled Establishments.
For food establishments that are required to submit plans as specified under § 8-201.11 the regulatory authority shall issue a
permit to the applicant after:
(A) A properly completed application is submitted;
(B) The required fee is submitted;
(C) The required plans, specifications, and information are reviewed and approved; and
(D) A preoperational inspection as specified in § 8-203.10 shows that the establishment is built or remodeled in accordance
with the approved plans and specifications and that the establishment is in compliance with this Code.
8-303.20 Existing Establishments, Permit Renewal, and Change of Ownership.
The regulatory authority may renew a permit for an existing food establishment or may issue a permit to a new owner of an
existing food establishment after a properly completed application is submitted, reviewed, and approved, the fees are paid,
and an inspection shows that the establishment is in compliance with this Code.
8-303.30 Denial of Application for Permit, Notice.
If an application for a permit to operate is denied, the regulatory authority shall provide the applicant with a notice that
includes:
(A) The specific reasons and Code citations for the permit denial;
(B) The actions, if any, that the applicant must take to qualify for a permit; and
(C) Advisement of the applicant's right of appeal and the process and time frames for appeal that are provided under ORS
chapter 183.
8-304.10 Responsibilities of the Regulatory Authority.
(A) At the time a permit is first issued, the regulatory authority shall provide to the permit holder information on how to
obtain a copy of this Code so that the permit holder is notified of the compliance requirements and the conditions of
retention, as specified under § 8-304.11, that are applicable to the permit.
(B) Failure to provide the information specified in ¶ (A) of this section does not prevent the regulatory authority from taking
authorized action or seeking remedies if the permit holder fails to comply with this Code or an order, warning, or directive of
the regulatory authority.
8-304.11 Responsibilities of the Permit Holder.
Upon acceptance of the permit issued by the regulatory authority, the permit holder in order to retain the permit shall:
(A) Post the permit in a location in the food establishment that is conspicuous to consumers;
(B) Comply with the provisions of this Code including the conditions of a granted variance as specified under § 8-103.12,
and approved plans as specified under § 8-201.12;
(C) If a food establishment is required under § 8-201.13 to operate under a HACCP plan, comply with the plan as specified
under § 8-103.12;
(D) Immediately contact the regulatory authority to report an illness of an employee as specified under § 2-201.11(B);
(E) Immediately discontinue operations and notify the regulatory authority if an imminent health hazard may exist as
specified under § 8-404.11;
(F) Allow representatives of the regulatory authority access to the food establishment as specified under § 8-402.11;
(G) Replace existing facilities and equipment specified in § 8-101.10 with facilities and equipment that comply with this
Code if:
(1) The regulatory authority directs the replacement because the facilities and equipment constitute a public health
hazard or nuisance or no longer comply with the criteria upon which the facilities and equipment were accepted,
(2) The regulatory authority directs the replacement to meet current code requirements after the food establishment has
been closed for a minimum of six consecutive months. This provision also applies to mobile food units that were
licensed prior to February 1, 2020, or
(3) The facilities and equipment are replaced in the normal course of operation;
88
(H) Comply with directives of the regulatory authority including time frames for corrective actions specified in inspection
reports, notices, orders, warnings, and other directives issued by the regulatory authority in regard to the permit holder's food
establishment or in response to community emergencies;
(I) Accept notices issued and served by the regulatory authority as may be authorized under ORS chapter 183 and chapter
624; and
(J) Be subject to the administrative, civil, injunctive, and criminal remedies as may be authorized under ORS chapter 183 and
chapter 624.
8-304.20 Permits Not Transferable.
A permit may not be transferred from one person to another person, from one food establishment to another, or from one type
of operation to another if the food operation changes from the type of operation specified in the application as specified under
¶ 8-302.14(C) and the change in operation is not approved.
8-4 INSPECTION AND CORRECTION OF VIOLATIONS
Subparts 8-401 Frequency
8-402 Access
8-403 Report of Findings
8-404 Imminent Health Hazard
8-405 Priority and Priority Foundation Items
8-401.10 Establishing Inspection Interval.
(A) Except as specified in ¶¶ (B) and (C) of this section, the regulatory authority shall inspect a food establishment at least
once every 6 months.
(B) [Deleted]
(C) For temporary food establishments:
(1) Except for Subparagraph (C)(2) of this section, the regulatory authority shall inspect at least once during the
operation of a temporary food establishment.
(2) For benevolent single-event temporary food establishments, the regulatory authority shall either:
(a) Inspect, or
(b) Provide a consultation.
8-401.20 Performance- and Risk-Based. [Deleted]
8-402.10 Competency of Inspectors.
An authorized representative of the regulatory authority who inspects a food establishment or conducts plan review for
compliance with this Code shall have the knowledge, skills, and ability to adequately perform the required duties.
8-402.11 Allowed at Reasonable Times after Due Notice.
After the regulatory authority presents official credentials and provides notice of the purpose of, and an intent to conduct, an
inspection, the person in charge shall allow the regulatory authority to determine if the food establishment is in compliance
with this Code by allowing access to the establishment, allowing inspection, and providing information and records specified
in this Code and to which the regulatory authority is entitled according to law, during the food establishment's hours of
operation and other reasonable times.
8-402.20 Refusal, Notification of Right to Access, and Final Request for Access.
If a person denies access to the regulatory authority, the regulatory authority shall:
(A) Inform the person that:
(1) The permit holder is required to allow access to the regulatory authority as specified under § 8-402.11 of this Code,
(2) Access is a condition of the acceptance and retention of a food establishment permit to operate as specified under ¶
8-304.11(F), and
(B) Make a final request for access.
89
8-402.30 Refusal, Reporting.
If after the regulatory authority presents credentials and provides notice as specified under § 8-402.11, explains the authority
upon which access is requested, and makes a final request for access as specified in § 8-402.20, the person in charge
continues to refuse access, the regulatory authority shall provide details of the denial of access on an inspection report form.
8-402.40 Inspection Order to Gain Access. [Deleted]
8-403.10 Documenting Information and Observations.
The regulatory authority shall document on an inspection report form:
(A) Administrative information about the food establishment's legal identity, street and mailing addresses, type of
establishment and operation as specified under ¶ 8-302.14(C), inspection date, and employee food handler certificates; and
(B) Specific factual observations of violative conditions or other deviations from this Code that require correction by the
permit holder including:
(1) Failure of the person in charge to demonstrate the knowledge of foodborne illness prevention, application of HACCP
principles, and the requirements of this Code specified under § 2-102.11,
(2) Failure of food employees and the person in charge to demonstrate their knowledge of their responsibility to report a
disease or medical condition as specified under §§ 2-201.11,
(3) Nonconformance with priority items or priority foundation items of this Code,
(4) Failure of the appropriate food employees to demonstrate their knowledge of, and ability to perform in accordance
with, the procedural, monitoring, verification, and corrective action practices required by the regulatory authority as
specified under § 8-103.12,
(5) Failure of the person in charge to provide records required by the regulatory authority for determining conformance
with a HACCP plan as specified under Subparagraph 8-201.14(D)(6), and
(6) Nonconformance with critical limits of a HACCP plan.
8-403.20 Specifying Time Frame for Corrections.
The regulatory authority shall specify on the inspection report form the time frame for correction of the violations as
specified under §§ 8-404.11, and 8-405.11.
8-403.30 Issuing Report and Obtaining Acknowledgment of Receipt.
At the conclusion of the inspection and according to law, the regulatory authority shall provide a copy of the completed
inspection report and the notice to correct violations to the permit holder or to the person in charge, and request a signed
acknowledgment of receipt.
8-403.40 Refusal to Sign Acknowledgment.
The regulatory authority shall:
(A) Inform a person who declines to sign an acknowledgment of receipt of inspectional findings as specified in § 8-403.30
that:
(1) An acknowledgment of receipt is not an agreement with findings,
(2) Refusal to sign an acknowledgment of receipt will not affect the permit holder's obligation to correct the violations
noted in the inspection report within the time frames specified, and
(3) A refusal to sign an acknowledgment of receipt is noted in the inspection report and conveyed to the regulatory
authority's historical record for the food establishment; and
(B) Make a final request that the person in charge sign an acknowledgment receipt of inspectional findings.
8-403.50 Public Information.
Except as specified in § 8-202.10, the regulatory authority shall treat the inspection report as a public document and shall
make it available for disclosure to a person who requests it as provided in law.
8-404.11 Ceasing Operations and Reporting.
(A) Except as specified in ¶ (B) of this section, a permit holder shall immediately discontinue operations and notify the
regulatory authority if an imminent health hazard may exist because of an emergency such as a fire, flood, extended
interruption of electrical or water service, sewage backup, misuse of poisonous or toxic materials, onset of an apparent
foodborne illness outbreak, gross insanitary occurrence or condition, or other circumstance that may endanger public health.P
(B) A permit holder need not discontinue operations in an area of an establishment that is unaffected by the imminent health
hazard.
90
8-404.12 Resumption of Operations.
If operations are discontinued as specified under § 8-404.11 or otherwise according to law, the permit holder shall obtain
approval from the regulatory authority before resuming operations.
8-405.11 Timely Correction.
(A) Except as specified in ¶ (B) of this section, a permit holder shall at the time of inspection correct a violation of a priority
item or priority foundation item of this Code and implement corrective actions for a HACCP plan provision that is not in
compliance with its critical limit.Pf
(B) Considering the nature of the potential hazard involved and the complexity of the corrective action needed, the regulatory
authority may agree to or specify a longer time frame, not to exceed 14 calendar days after the inspection, for the permit
holder to correct violations of a priority item or priority foundation item or HACCP plan deviations.
8-405.20 Verification and Documentation of Correction.
(A) After observing at the time of inspection a correction of a violation of a priority or priority foundation item or HACCP
plan deviation, the regulatory authority shall enter the violation and information about the corrective action on the inspection
report.
(B) As specified under ¶ 8-405.11(B), after receiving notification that the permit holder has corrected a violation of a priority
item or a priority foundation item or HACCP plan deviation, or at the end of the specified period of time, the regulatory
authority shall verify correction of the violation, document the information on an inspection report, and enter the report in the
regulatory authority's records.
8-406.11 Time Frame for Correction. [Deleted]
8-5 PREVENTION OF FOODBORNE DISEASE TRANSMISSION BY EMPLOYEES
Subpart 8-501 Investigation and Control
8-501.10 Obtaining Information: Personal History of Illness, Medical Examination, and
Specimen Analysis.
The regulatory authority shall act when it has reasonable cause to believe that a food employee or conditional employee has
possibly transmitted disease; may be infected with a disease in a communicable form that is transmissible through food; may
be a carrier of infectious agents that cause a disease that is transmissible through food; or is affected with a boil, an infected
wound, or acute respiratory infection, by:
(A) Securing a confidential medical history of the employee or conditional employee suspected of transmitting disease or
making other investigations as deemed appropriate; and
(B) Requiring appropriate medical examinations, including collection of specimens for laboratory analysis, of a suspected
food employee and conditional employee.
8-501.20 Restriction or Exclusion of Food Employee, or Summary Suspension of Permit.
Based on the findings of an investigation related to a food employee or conditional employee who is suspected of being
infected or diseased, the regulatory authority may issue an order to the suspected food employee, conditional employee or
permit holder instituting one or more of the following control measures:
(A) Restricting the food employee or conditional employee;
(B) Excluding the food employee or conditional employee; or
(C) Closing the food establishment by summarily suspending a permit to operate as may be provided under ORS chapter 624.
8-501.30 Restriction or Exclusion Order: Warning or Hearing Not Required, Information
Required in Order.
Based on the findings of the investigation as specified in § 8-501.10 and to control disease transmission, the regulatory
authority may issue an order of restriction or exclusion to a suspected food employee or the permit holder without prior
warning, notice of a hearing, or a hearing if the order:
(A) States the reasons for the restriction or exclusion that is ordered;
(B) States the evidence that the food employee or permit holder shall provide in order to demonstrate that the reasons for the
restriction or exclusion are eliminated;
(C) States that the suspected food employee or the permit holder may request an appeal hearing by submitting a timely
request as provided under ORS chapter 183; and
(D) Provides the name and address of the regulatory authority representative to whom a request for an appeal hearing may be
made.
91
DEPARTMENT OF HUMAN SERVICES
DIVISION 157
INSPECTION AND LICENSING PROCEDURE
RESTAURANTS AND BED AND BREAKFAST FACILITIES
333-157-0000 Inspection Form Procedures
(1) The Local Public Health Authority shall document violations observed during any sanitation inspection by including the
following information on the form approved by the Authority:
(a) The number of the related item on the Inspection Form;
(b) The point value associated with the item including penalty additions;
(c) Oregon Administrative Rule or Oregon Revised Statute number violated; and
(d) A brief statement of the specific problem and required corrections.
(2) Calculation of Points:
(a) Three point priority foundation items shall be given an additional three point weight when a repeat violation is
observed;
(b) Five point priority items shall be given an additional five point weight when a repeat violation is observed;
(c) Additional points shall accumulate and be added to the value of uncorrected items that are repeat violations;
(d) Each three point priority foundation item can accumulate to six points.
(e) Each five point priority item can accumulate to 10 points.
(3) Violations creating a potential danger to public health shall be recorded as in section (1) of this rule and shall specify:
(a) Any alternative procedure as may be approved, the time limit for its use, and that the alternative procedure must be
implemented immediately; and
(b) The corrections to be made and the time limit by which the corrections shall be made. In the case where an alternative
procedure has not been approved, the time limit by which the correction must be made shall be within but not to exceed
14 days.
(4) Violations creating an imminent or present danger to public health shall be recorded as required in sections (1) and (3) of
this rule except when no alternative procedure is approved, the correction shall be required immediately.
(5) If a restaurant obtains a sanitation score of less than 70 upon an unannounced complete inspection, the operator or person
in charge shall be notified by a statement on the inspection form that the restaurant shall be closed, if the score of another
complete inspection conducted within 30 days is not 70 or above.
(6) Violations creating a significantly increased risk for foodborne illness shall require a recheck inspection if found on
consecutive complete inspections, and for the purposes of enforcement shall be considered uncorrected.
(7) If a restaurant is ordered closed, the closure order as designated by the Authority shall be attached to the inspection form
and delivered to the operator or person in charge.
333-157-0010 Approved Alternative Procedures
(1) An alternative procedure may be approved on a temporary basis for a designated time period, if in the judgment of the
Environmental Health Specialist the procedure provides interim health and safety protection equal to that provided by the
rule. The Environmental Health Specialist may extend the designated time period if justified by unforeseen circumstances.
Such an alternative procedure shall not authorize or condone any priority item or priority foundation item violation.
(2) All alternative procedures which have been approved shall be implemented immediately.
333-157-0020 Public Notice of Restaurant Sanitation
(1) The notice of restaurant sanitation shall be based upon the sanitation score calculated on the inspection form at the end of
each unannounced complete inspection and shall be posted at a customary entrance to the establishment. If, upon recheck
inspection, any priority item or priority foundation item violation listed on the inspection form is not corrected within the
designated time limit, the notice of restaurant sanitation posted at the end of the unannounced complete inspection shall be
removed, the notice of closure posted, and closure action taken.
(2) A notice of restaurant sanitation that states that the establishment "Complied with the Acceptable Sanitation Standards"
shall be assigned to a restaurant that obtains a sanitation score of 70 or more in an unannounced complete inspection provided
all priority item and priority foundation item violations have been corrected or remedied by approved alternative procedures.
Upon recheck inspection, any uncorrected priority item and priority foundation item violations shall cause the notice of
restaurant sanitation to be removed, the notice of closure to be posted, and closure action taken.
92
(3) A notice of restaurant sanitation that states that the establishment "Failed to Comply with the Acceptable Sanitation
Standards" shall be assigned to a restaurant that obtains a sanitation score of less than 70 in an unannounced complete
inspection provided all priority item and priority foundation item violations have been corrected or remedied by approved
alternative procedures. Such a notice of restaurant sanitation shall remain until the facility is closed or until a sanitation score
of 70 or more is obtained upon another inspection conducted within 30 days.
333-157-0025 Communication and Compliance Protocols
Communication and compliance protocols will be provided by the Assistant Director to operators of non-complying food
service facilities. This communication will convey current and potential compliance actions, and will include the appropriate
use of correspondence, meetings, and officials notices.
333-157-0027 Increased Inspection Schedule
(1) Any restaurant that fails to obtain a minimum acceptable sanitation score of 70 or more for two consecutive, unannounced
semi-annual inspections shall be subject to an increased inspection schedule.
(2) Except as provided in section (4) of this rule, this schedule will consist of one complete unannounced inspection a quarter
(three month period) as well as any re-check inspections required. This inspection schedule shall begin in the quarter
immediately following the second consecutive score of less than 70.
(3) The increased inspection schedule will revert to semi-annual inspections after the facility has obtained four (4)
consecutive scores of 70 or above.
(4) At the Assistant Director's option, one of the four required inspections may be an inspection using Hazard Analysis and
Critical Control Point (HACCP) principles, as defined in these rules. HACCP based inspections may be announced.
Participation by a restaurant in a HACCP-based inspection shall be the equivalent of a score of 70 or above for the purposes
of this rule.
(5) The inspecting agency may assess a fee for each quarterly inspection required under this rule of up to one-half of the
annual licensing fee otherwise assessable to the restaurant.
333-157-0030 Closure of Restaurants
(1) If the Administrator closes a restaurant, a statement by the Authority ordering closure and specifying the reasons
therefore, and signed by the Administrator, shall be attached to the inspection form and delivered to the operator or person in
charge:
(a) When a restaurant is closed, the Administrator shall post the notice of closure at a customary entrance;
(b) No person except the Administrator shall remove or alter this notice;
(c) No person shall operate a restaurant that has been closed.
(2) If a violation which creates an imminent or present danger to public health is not corrected immediately or an approved
alternative procedure is not initiated immediately by the operator, the restaurant shall be closed.
(3) If a violation which creates a potential danger to public health has not been corrected within the designated time limit, the
restaurant shall be closed.
(4) When a restaurant has been closed because a priority item and priority foundation item violation(s) has not been
corrected, it may be reopened after 24 hours if:
(a) A recheck inspection by the Administrator confirms that all priority item and priority foundation item violations have
been corrected; and
(b) A closure dismissal order designated by the Authority is delivered to the operator or person in charge; and
(c) The closed sign previously posted is removed by the Administrator;
(d) A restaurant may be reopened earlier than 24 hours following a voluntary meeting attended by the restaurant operator
or person in charge, the Administrator, and the inspecting Environmental Health Specialist, at which the provisions of
subsections (4)(a) through (c) of this section are demonstrated to be met;
(e) A restaurant closed and reopened as described in this subsection shall be assigned a notice of restaurant sanitation
based on the sanitation score of the unannounced complete inspection which identified the priority item and priority
foundation item violations causing the closure.
(5) If a restaurant has obtained a sanitation score of less than 70 on two consecutive complete inspections conducted within
30 days as described in OAR 333-157-0000(5), it shall be closed.
(6) When a restaurant has been closed for failure to obtain a minimum acceptable sanitation score of 70 or more, it may be
reopened after 24 hours if:
(a) The operator submits a written plan of correction, specifying the corrections to be made and time limits for their
completion, which would achieve a sanitation score of 80 points by the next semi-annual inspection; and
(b) The plan of correction is approved by the Administrator; and
(c) A complete inspection after the restaurant has been closed produces a sanitation score of 70 or more.
(d) A closure dismissal order designated by the Authority is delivered to the operator or person in charge; and
93
(e) The closed sign previously posted is removed by the Administrator;
(f) A restaurant may be reopened earlier than 24 hours following a voluntary meeting attended by the restaurant operator
or person in charge, the Administrator, and the inspecting Environmental Health Specialist, at which the provision of
subsections (6)(a) through (e) of this section are demonstrated to be met;
(g) A restaurant closed and reopened as described in this subsection shall be assigned a notice of restaurant sanitation
based on the sanitation score of the complete inspection performed while the restaurant was closed.
(7) Appeals of closures are contested cases pursuant to ORS chapter 183.
(8) Operators whose facilities have been closed for failure to obtain a minimum acceptable sanitation score of 70 or more, or
for failure to correct repeat priority item and priority foundation item violations must agree in writing, as part of reopening
the restaurant, to:
(a) Enroll in and successfully complete an approved food manager training course; or
(b) In the event that an extraordinary situation exists whereby an approved food manager training course is not available
to the operator, the Administrator shall make provision for an alternative type of food manager training using criteria
approved by the Authority.
333-157-0040 Display of Public Notice of Restaurant Sanitation
It shall be unlawful for any restaurant to display a Public Notice of Restaurant Sanitation other than the one awarded by the
Administrator. It shall be unlawful for anyone except the Administrator to post, change, remove, or deface a Public Notice of
Restaurant Sanitation.
333-157-0045 Civil Penalties
(1) The Authority or a Local Public Health Authority may impose civil penalties on any person for the following willful
violations:
(a) Operation of a restaurant, bed and breakfast facility or vending machine without a current license to do so from the
Authority or the Local Public Health Authority;
(b) Failure to cease operation of a restaurant, bed and breakfast facility or vending machine that has been closed due to
uncorrected priority item violations. This authority shall be limited to those priority item violations identified as creating
an imminent or present danger to public health and defined in OAR 333-150-0000 Section 1-201.10.
(2) For the purposes of section (1) of this rule, the term 'willful' means intentional or deliberate.
(3) The maximum civil penalty for each of the violations listed in section (1) of this rule is $500 per day of violation.
(4) Civil penalties shall be imposed in the manner provided by ORS chapter 183 or the equivalent.
333-157-0070 Licensing
Any license issued by the Authority pursuant to ORS chapter 624 shall expire and may be reinstated on December 31 of each
year; except for temporary restaurant licenses issued pursuant to ORS 624.082, 624.084 and 624.086.
333-157-0073 Temporary Restaurant Definitions
(1) “Intermittent temporary restaurant” means an establishment:
(a) That operates temporarily at a specific location in connection with multiple public gatherings, entertainment events,
food product promotions or other events, at least two of which are arranged for by different oversight organizations; and
(b) Where food is prepared or served for consumption by the public.
(2) “Operational review” means the examination of a plan of operation for an establishment in order to ensure that the
proposed operation conforms with applicable sanitation standards.
(3) “Oversight organization” means an entity responsible for organizing, managing or otherwise arranging for a public
gathering, entertainment event, food product promotion or other event, including but not limited to ensuring the availability
of water, sewer and sanitation services.
(4) “Seasonal temporary restaurant” means an establishment:
(a) That operates at a specific location in connection with multiple public gatherings, entertainment events, food product
promotions or other events that are arranged for by the same oversight organization; and
(b) Where food is prepared or served for consumption by the public.
(5) “Single-event temporary restaurant” means an establishment:
(a) That operates in connection with a single public gathering, entertainment event, food product promotion or other
event; and
(b) Where food is prepared or served for consumption by the public.
94
(6) “Substantial menu alteration” means a change of menu that increases the complexity of the menu of a seasonal temporary
restaurant and intermittent temporary restaurant operation. For purposes of these rules, an increase in complexity occurs
when the menu moves from:
(a) Service of ready-to-eat foods that requires no further preparation or cooking; to
(b) Foods that are prepared or cooked on-site and served directly to the consumer that day; to
(c) Foods that must be prepared in the operation in advance and reheated or cooled over the course of multiple days of
operation.
333-157-0077 Temporary Restaurant Licensing and Inspection
(1) A person may not operate a single-event, intermittent or seasonal temporary restaurant without first procuring a license to
do so from the Local Public Health Authority.
(2) (a) Application for an intermittent or seasonal temporary restaurant license shall be in writing in the form prescribed by
the Authority and shall contain the name and address of the applicant, the specific location of the intermittent or seasonal
temporary restaurant, a description of the public gatherings, entertainment events, food product promotions or other
events to be served by the intermittent or seasonal temporary restaurant, an operational review and any other information
the Authority may require. In addition to the application the applicant for an intermittent or seasonal temporary
restaurant license shall pay to the Local Public Health Authority the appropriate license fee under ORS 624.490.
(b) The Local Public Health Authority shall issue a license to a benevolent organization to operate a single-event
temporary restaurant if the benevolent organization has notified the Local Public Health Authority orally or in writing
that the benevolent organization intends to operate a single-event temporary restaurant. A Local Public Health Authority
may not charge a benevolent organization a license fee or inspection fee for a single-event temporary restaurant.
(3) (a) Intermittent and seasonal temporary restaurants must complete and submit an operational plan for review by the
Local Public Health Authority prior to obtaining a license and operation of the establishment.
(b) Intermittent and seasonal temporary restaurants that do not complete an operational plan prior to operation may
operate under one or more single-event temporary licenses until the operational plan can be completed and approved.
(c) After the operational plan has been completed by the Local Public Health Authority, another operational plan is not
required for subsequent licenses, unless deemed necessary by the Local Public Health Authority.
(4) The single-event, intermittent or seasonal temporary restaurant license shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the
premises of the licensee.
(5) An intermittent temporary restaurant license shall expire 30 days after issuance.
(6) A seasonal temporary restaurant license shall expire 90 days after issuance.
(7) A single-event temporary restaurant license shall terminate 30 days after issuance unless within 30 days the single-event
temporary restaurant is discontinued or moved from the specific location for which the license was issued.
(8) An intermittent or seasonal temporary license shall terminate immediately if:
(a) The intermittent or seasonal temporary restaurant prepares or serves food for consumption by the public that is not in
connection with a public gathering, entertainment event, food product promotion or other event held by an oversight
organization;
(b) The location of the intermittent or seasonal temporary restaurant changes; or
(c) The menu is substantially altered as defined by OAR 333-157-0073(6).
(d) If a licensed operation undergoes a substantial menu alteration, then a new license and completed operational plan is
required.
(9) If the license of an intermittent or seasonal temporary restaurant is terminated under section (8) of this rule, the
intermittent or seasonal temporary restaurant may reapply for a license in accordance with section (2) of this rule.
(10) The Local Public Health Authority may suspend, deny or revoke a single-event, intermittent or seasonal temporary
restaurant license if it appears, after a reasonable time has been given for correction of a sanitation violation, that the
applicant does not meet applicable minimum sanitation standards as described in ORS 624.010 through 624.121 or in OAR
333-150-0000. Any suspension, denial or revocation action shall be taken in accordance with ORS Chapter 183.
(11) The Local Public Health Authority may conduct a reinspection of a seasonal or intermittent temporary restaurant if a
priority item or priority foundation item violation is uncorrected and a separate follow-up visit is necessary to determine
compliance.
(12) A seasonal or intermittent temporary restaurant that has uncorrected priority item and priority foundation item violations
and for which an alternative procedure has not been approved shall be closed in accordance with ORS 624.096.
(13) The renewal of a single-event, intermittent or seasonal temporary restaurant license shall be in accordance with section
(2) of this rule.
95
333-157-0080 Fees
(1) Fees for eating and drinking establishments and other food service activities subject to ORS chapter 624 shall be as
specified in ORS chapter 624.
(2) Any restaurant providing food or beverage solely to children, elderly persons, indigent or other needy populations shall
not be required to pay a restaurant license fee to the Authority if such restaurant is:
(a) Operated by a benevolent organization as defined in ORS 624.015; and
(b) The patrons or recipients are not required to pay the full cost of the food or beverage.
(3) A restaurant that meets the criteria in section (2) of this rule must still obtain a restaurant license and must comply with
OAR 333-150-0000.
96
DEPARTMENT OF HUMAN SERVICES
DIVISION 158
COMBINATION FOOD SERVICE FACILITIES
Combination Facilities Engaged in Activities Subject to Regulation by the Oregon Department of
Agriculture and by the Oregon Health Authority
333-158-0000 Licensing and Inspections
The licensing of combination facilities shall be the responsibility of either the Authority or the Oregon Department of
Agriculture in accordance with the following criteria:
(1) The establishments subject to these rules are those combination facilities as defined in OAR 333-150-0000 1-201.10(B).
(2) A determination shall be made for each firm covered in OAR 333-150-0000 1-201.10(B) as to which agency shall inspect
and license. The determination shall be based upon which agency has statutory responsibility and authority for the
predominant activities of the firm.
(3) In those instances where it is determined that either a full or limited service restaurant or other activity for which the
Authority has authority, is predominant, the Authority shall perform the inspectional and licensing responsibilities to the
exclusion of the Oregon Department of Agriculture.
(4) In those instances where it is determined that the bakery, retail grocery, food processing or other activities for which the
Oregon Department of Agriculture has authority, is predominant, the Oregon Department of Agriculture shall perform the
inspectional and licensing responsibilities to the exclusion of the Authority.
(5) The determination of the predominant activity at any combination facility subject to this agreement shall be made first by
the field Environmental Health Specialists. If agreement is not reached, then it shall be referred to program supervisors of the
Local Public Health Authority, and the Oregon Department of Agriculture for a determination of predominant activity. If an
agreement is not reached among the Local Public Health Authority and the Oregon Department of Agriculture, or if a
licensed facility disagrees with the determination, the matter may be appealed to an arbitration panel composed of the
Administrator of the Food and Dairy Division (or appointee), the Administrator of the Center for Health Protection (or
appointee), and one representative each from the Conference of Local Health Officials, an association representing the
restaurant industry and an association representing the retail grocery industry. The decision of this panel shall be final except
as provided in section (6) of this rule.
(6) Any licensee wishing to contest the determination of predominance by agencies may produce records of gross annual
sales to support the protest and be heard by the Local Public Health Authority in accordance with ORS chapter 183.
(7) Notwithstanding sections (2) through (6) of this rule, if the Local Public Health Authority and the Oregon Department of
Agriculture agree that the complexity rather than the predominance of food processing activities should determine the
regulating agency, inspectional and licensing responsibilities may be transferred to the Oregon Department of Agriculture to
the exclusion of the Local Public Health Authority.
333-158-0010 Applicability of Rules
(1) Any facility licensed and inspected by the Authority, pursuant to OAR 333-158-0000 through 333-158-0030, shall be
subject to the applicable rules under OAR Chapter 333 of the Authority for all activities subject to ORS Chapter 624. The
facility shall also be subject to the applicable statutes and rules under ORS 616 and 625, and OAR 603-021-0010, 603-021-
0015, 603-021-0021, 603-021-0022, 603-021-0025, 603-021-0612, 603-025-0010 through 603-025-0040, 603-025-0080
through 603-025-0190 and 603-025-0220 of the Oregon Department of Agriculture, which are hereby adopted by reference.
(2) Any facility licensed and inspected by the Oregon Department of Agriculture, pursuant to OAR 333-158-0000 through
333-158-0030, shall be subject to the applicable rules under OAR Chapter 603 of the Oregon Department of Agriculture for
all activities subject to statutes administered by the Oregon Department of Agriculture and ORS Chapter 624.
333-158-0020 Licenses and Permits
Licenses and permits issued pursuant to these rules shall be subject to the statutes of the licensing and inspecting agency,
including fees and legal remedies, and shall be deemed to satisfy the licensing statutes of the other agency.
333-158-0030 Periodic Review
At least annual re-evaluations of predominance shall be made by the regulating agencies and changes in jurisdiction shall be
made where indicated.
97
OREGON HEALTH AUTHORITY
DIVISION 160
DESTRUCTION OF FOOD UNFIT FOR HUMAN CONSUMPTION
333-160-0000 Destruction and Embargo of Mishandled, Adulterated or Spoiled Food and
Beverage
Whenever the Authority finds food or beverage for which there is probable cause to believe is adulterated, mishandled,
spoiled, or otherwise potentially dangerous to health, the Authority shall immediately notify the person in charge that the
product is hazardous; and shall request immediate destruction of the product. If the person in charge agrees, the food or
beverage shall be destroyed or removed in a manner specified by the Authority:
(1) If the person in charge will not agree to destruction, an embargo order shall be placed on the food or beverage. The order
shall include:
(a) A statement of the reasons for the embargo;
(b) A description of the products, their location and the amount of product embargoed;
(c) The date and time of day when the order is issued, and the signature of the inspecting Environmental Health
Specialist.
(2) The product shall be marked, sealed, isolated, and otherwise identified as required by the Authority to ensure that it
remains off sale and is not moved prior to final disposition of the embargo.
(3) After placement of an embargo order, samples may be taken for testing by the Authority.
(4) If the order of embargo does not include a notice of hearing; within 48 hours of the placement of an embargo, the person
in charge shall be notified in writing that a hearing on the embargo order will be held if requested in writing within ten (10)
days of the delivery of the notice.
(5) If a hearing is requested, it shall be held in accordance with ORS 183 and the model rules of the Attorney General for
contested cases.
(6) If no hearing is requested as provided in section (4) of this rule, a default order for destruction shall be issued to the
person in charge.
(7) Destruction or removal of embargoed product shall be done only under the direct supervision of the Authority.
Denaturation may be required where it is necessary to render the product unpalatable or to identify it as unfit for human
consumption.
(8) Violation of any embargo or destruction order or removal of any product under embargo is grounds for closure of the
facility, revocation or denial of license or criminal penalties provided under ORS 624.990.
98
DEPARTMENT OF HUMAN SERVICES
DIVISION 162
MOBILE FOOD UNITS, COMMISSARIES AND WAREHOUSES
333-162-0020 Mobile Food Units, General Requirements
(1) Mobile food units shall comply with the applicable requirements in OAR 333-150-0000 and these rules. The Authority
may impose additional requirements to protect against health hazards related to the conduct of the mobile food unit operation
and may prohibit the sale of potentially hazardous food.
(2) There are four types of mobile food units:
(a) Class I. These mobile food units can serve only intact, packaged foods and non-potentially hazardous beverages. No
preparation or assembly of foods or beverages may take place on the unit. Non-potentially hazardous beverages must be
provided from covered urns or dispenser heads only. No dispensed ice is allowed;
(b) Class II. These mobile food units may serve foods allowed under Class I and provide hot and cold holding display
areas from which unpackaged foods are displayed. Self-service by customers of unpackaged foods is not allowed.
Preparation, assembly or cooking of foods is not allowed on the unit;
(c) Class III. These mobile food units may serve any food item allowed under Class I and II mobile food units, and may
cook, prepare and assemble food items on the unit. However, cooking and service of raw animal foods on the unit is not
allowed;
(d) Class IV. These mobile food units may serve a full menu.
(3) Mobile food units must be maintained and operated as originally designed and approved during the plan review process.
Units licensed prior to February 1, 2020 must meet this requirement by January 1, 2023.Pf
(4) (a) Mobile food units must be designed and constructed to move as a single piece. Mobile food units may not consist of
multiple components that are assembled at the operating location. The requirement applies to mobile food units designed,
constructed or extensively remodeled after February 1, 2020.
(b) Notwithstanding subsection (4)(a) of this rule, a mobile food unit that must be assembled at the operating location
because the unit will be in a building or structure that prevents the unit from being moved in one piece may be
allowed if the assembly is part of the initial licensing process. Examples of this include a unit located in the upper
floors of a high-rise building that cannot be transported through the front entrance or in an elevator.
(5) Notwithstanding OAR 333-150-0000 Section 5-305.11 (D) and subsections (a) and (b) of this section, all operations and
equipment shall be an integral part of the mobile food unit. A mobile food unit may use folding shelves or small tables that
are integral to the unit for display of non-potentially hazardous condiments and customer single use articles. The shelves or
small tables must be designed and installed so that they do not impede the mobility of the unit when retracted.Pf
(a) A Class IV mobile food unit may use one cooking unit that is not integral to the mobile food unit. The cooking unit
may only be used under the following conditions:Pf
(i) The cooking unit must be limited to the used of a barbecue, smoker, hearth oven or similar cooking device that
can be transported in conjunction with the mobile food unit. The use of equipment such as flat-top grills, griddles,
woks, steamtables, stovetops, ovens or other cooking, storage or holding devices is not allowed;Pf
(ii) It must be located adjacent to the mobile food unit;Pf
(iii) The cooking unit may only be used for cooking and not for processing, portioning, preparation, or assembly of
food;Pf and
(iv) A handwashing system shall be provided adjacent to the cooking unit as specified in OAR 333-150-0000 section
5-203.11(C)Pf.
(b) Mobile food units may display packaged, non-potentially hazardous food items, such as cans of soda or bags of
chips, off the unit if they are limited to what could be sold during a typical meal period.
(6) Mobile food unit operators may provide seating for customers if a readily accessible restroom and sufficient refuse
containers with lids or covers are provided. The restroom must have a handwashing facility that provides hot and cold
running water and meets the requirements of OAR 333-150-0000 §§ 6-301.11, 6-301.12, 6-301.20 and 6-302.11.
(7) Auxiliary storage may be provided if it is limited to impervious, nonabsorbent and covered containers that are stored and
located in a manner to preclude contamination or infestation. Overhead protection may be required if necessary, to protect
auxiliary storage for contamination.Pf
(a) Auxiliary storage must be limited to items necessary for that day's operation and must be moved from outside
the unit and stored inside the unit or at a licensed warehouse or commissary during hours the unit is not in
operation.Pf
(b) No self-service, assembly or preparation activities may occur from auxiliary storage containers. Auxiliary
storage may not be used as a substitute for hot and cold holding facilities on the mobile food unit.Pf
99
(c) Refrigerators or freezers used for auxiliary storage may not be placed outside of the unit and must be located
inside a licensed commissary or warehouse. An ice merchandiser that is used to store packaged ice from a
commercial source may be allowed if the ice merchandiser is licensed as a warehouse and secured when the unit is
not in operation.Pf ¶
(d) Units licensed prior to February 1, 2020 must meet the requirements of section (7) by January 1, 2023.Pf
333-162-0030 Mobile Unit Operation, General
(1) Mobile food units must remain mobile at all times during operation. The wheels must be functional and appropriate for
the type of unit not be removed from the unit at the operating location. A removable tongue may be allowed if the tongue can
be removed with the use of only simple tools and the tools are available on the unit at all times. Units licensed prior to
February 1, 2020 in which the wheels, axels and associated equipment were removed prior to that date are not required to
meet this requirement.Pf
(2) A mobile food unit may not be used in lieu of a properly designed and constructed kitchen for a restaurant or
other food service establishment.P
(3) Catering and Delivery:
(a) Except as provided in subsection (c) of this section, a mobile food unit that does not have a licensed restaurant
or commissary as a base of operation may not provide catering services or sell food wholesale.P ¶
(b) Mobile food units must sell or dispense food directly from the point of sale on the unit to the ultimate
consumer.Pf
(c) A mobile food unit that does not have a licensed restaurant or commissary as a base of operation may provide
catering services if:P
(i) The unit is equipped with commercial-grade refrigeration equipment that meets or is the equivalent to the
requirements of OAR 333-150-0000 Section 4-205.10;
(ii) The unit has obtained a variance from the Oregon Health Authority; and
(iii) The unit provides only single-use articles for use by consumers.
(d) Mobile food units may utilize third-party delivery services and offer online ordering through the Internet.
333-162-0036 Mobile Food Units Operating as Single-Event Temporary Restaurants
A licensed mobile food unit operating as a single-event temporary restaurant as specified under ORS 624.650 may
utilize off-unit tables and display areas for non-potentially hazardous foods and dispensed beverages, condiments,
and single-service articles such as napkins and utensils. The unit may also utilize off-unit freezers if the food is
maintained frozen as required in OAR 333-150-0000 Section 3-501.11. The off-unit tables and display areas
allowed under this rule may not be used to conduct activities such as food preparation, assembly or cooking. The
display or dispensing of potentially hazardous foods is not allowed.
333-162-0040 Base of Operation
(1) Mobile food units and vending machines shall operate from a licensed restaurant, commissary or warehouse.P
(2) If a mobile food unit sells only packaged goods, a warehouse may be accepted in lieu of a commissary.
(3) Notwithstanding section (1) of this rule, self-contained mobile food units may not be required to have a base of operation
if the unit contains all the equipment and utensils necessary to assure the following:
(a) Maintaining proper hot and cold food temperatures during storage and transit;
(b) Providing adequate facilities for cooling and reheating of foods;
(c) Providing adequate handwashing facilities;
(d) Providing adequate warewashing facilities and assuring proper cleaning and sanitizing of the unit;
(e) Obtaining food and water from approved sources;
(f) Sanitary removal of waste water and garbage at approved locations.
(4) The ability to operate without a base of operation shall be determined by the regulatory authority.
(5) A mobile food unit may not serve as a commissary or warehouse for another mobile food unit.
(6) A private home kitchen or a home kitchen licensed by the Oregon Department of Agriculture may not be used as a
commissary.
100
333-162-0050 Exceptions
Class I mobile food units need not comply with the requirements of the rules pertaining to the necessity of water and sewage
systems nor to those requirements pertaining to the cleaning and sanitization of equipment and utensils.
333-162-0280 Food Transportation, General
(1) During transportation, food and food utensils shall be kept in covered containers or completely wrapped or
packaged to be protected from contamination. Foods in original individual packages do not need to be
overwrapped or covered if the original package is sealed.
(2) Food shall be maintained at required temperatures at all times during transport. Mobile food units that do not maintain
food at temperatures required in OAR 333-150-0000 §3-501.16 may be required to provide an on-board power source, such
as a battery or generator, to assure maintenance of food at proper temperatures during transit.
(3) After February 1, 2020, mobile food units that serve a complex menu and have never been licensed in Oregon
may not utilize cold plates that do not have an associated power source, such as a battery, generator or propane
tank, as the sole means for temperature control.
(4) Transport vehicles shall not be used in activities incompatible with safe and sanitary food service operations.
333-162-0470 Compressed Gas Bottles
Compressed gas bottles shall be fastened securely to a wall or stationary object at all times and in such a manner as to prevent
damage to the valve mechanism.
333-162-0680 Exterior and Overhead Protection
(1) Mobile food units must be secured and protected from contamination when not in operation. This exterior
protection may consist of moving the unit to an enclosed location, closing all exterior openings or covering the unit
in a secure fashion. Units licensed prior to February 1, 2020 must meet this requirement by January 1, 2023.Pf
(2) Overhead protection shall be provided for mobile food units that are operated outdoors and where food is not covered at
all times. The overhead protection may consist of, but not be limited to, roofing, ceilings, awnings, or umbrellas. Overhead
protection is not required for cooking units that have a lid or covering that will protect foods from contamination. The
overhead protection must be easily cleanable.
333-162-0930 Commissaries
(1) The commissary or other fixed food service establishment used as a base of operation for mobile food units or pushcarts
shall be constructed and operated in compliance with the requirements of OAR 333-150-0000.
(2) Notwithstanding section (1) of this rule, commissaries which are constructed in or adjacent to a single family residence
are not required to provide a separate restroom, if a restroom in the residence is available at all times during operation of the
commissary. The restroom facility must meet the requirements of OAR 333-150-0000.
333-162-0940 Warehouses
(1) A licensed warehouse may be used only for the storage of unopened packaged foods, single-service articles, utensils and
equipment. All other activities are prohibited.Pf
(2) A warehouse may not be used for the following activities:
(a) Cooling or storage of foods that have been prepared on a mobile food unit;
(b) Preparation, assembly, portioning, handling or service of unpackaged foods; and
(c) Ice making or warewashing;
(3) Activities prohibited in a warehouse in this section must be conducted in a licensed restaurant or commissary.
(4) Warehouses shall be required to meet only those rules necessary to prevent the contamination of stored foods, single-
service articles, utensils and equipment. In general, warehouses shall be exempt from the rules relating to finished walls,
ceilings or storage bases, light colored surfaces, restrooms, lavatories and utility facilities, provided foods are protected from
contamination from dust, insects, rodents, flooding, drainage, or other contaminants.
(5) An ice merchandiser that is used to store packaged ice from a commercial source may be allowed if the ice
merchandiser is licensed as a warehouse and secured when the unit is not in operation.
(6) The Assistant Director may impose additional requirements as deemed necessary to prevent the contamination of stored
foods, single-service articles, utensils, and equipment.
(7) A warehouse licensed prior to February 1, 2020 that is not in compliance with the provisions of this rule must meet these
requirements by January 1, 2023.
101
INSPECTION AND LICENSING PROCEDURES
MOBILE FOOD UNITS, COMMISSARIES AND WAREHOUSES
333-162-0880 Licensing Procedure
(1) All procedures shall be in accordance with ORS Chapter 624 in the licensure of mobile food units, commissaries and
warehouses. Any license issued by the Authority pursuant to ORS 624.320 shall expire and may be reinstated on December
31 of each year.
(2) A permanent license number shall be assigned each operator of mobile food units by the regulatory authority.
(3) Each mobile food unit shall be clearly marked with the licensee's name or a distinctive identifying symbol. The lettering
shall be at least 2 inches in height and of a color contrasting with the background color. If a symbol is used, it shall be at least
12 inches in diameter or of an equivalent size. An accurate scale drawing or photograph of the symbol shall be filed with the
regulatory authority.
(4) Each mobile food unit shall be clearly marked with a number for purposes of identifying each unit on inspection reports
and other communications.
(5) Stored units are not subject to licensure.
(6) All vehicles used as mobile food units shall be kept in good repair and in a sanitary condition while in use.
(7) The license shall be posted in the mobile food unit in public view.
333-162-0890 Inspection and Enforcement Procedures
Mobile food units shall comply with the inspection and enforcement procedures in OAR 333-157-0000, 333-157-0010, 333-
157-0020, 333-157-0025, 333-157-0027, 333-157-0030 and 333-157-0040.
333-162-0900 Posting of Inspection Report
One copy of the most recent inspection report shall be in the mobile unit at all times. One copy of the inspection report shall
be posted by the Assistant Director upon an inside wall of the commissary or warehouse. The inspection report shall not be
defaced or removed by any person except the Assistant Director.
333-162-0920 Plan Review
(1) Newly constructed or extensively remodeled mobile food units, commissaries and warehouses must undergo plan
review and a pre-operational inspection. Mobile food units that have been modified after plan review approval or
licensing may be required to revert to the design and construction that was initially approved if required by the
regulatory authority. Mobile food units having the sanitary approval of a recognized qualified, independent testing
laboratory, or approved by the Authority may be accepted without the submission of plans.Pf
(2) Approval from the Administrator to operate after the plan review process does not preclude obtaining required permits or
approvals from other agencies or jurisdictions of concern.
(3) Mobile food unit operators must obtain approval from the Administrator to add to or change menu items served from the
mobile food unit;P
(4) Mobile food units that operate on a fixed route must provide an itinerary to the regulatory authority prior to licensure and
at the beginning of each licensing period. Mobile food units operating at a specific or multiple locations shall provide a list
of all locations to the regulatory authority.
333-162-0950 Memorandum of Commissary or Warehouse Usage/Verification
A Memorandum of Commissary or Warehouse Usage/Verification shall be on file with the Administrator for mobile units
using a licensed food service facility as a commissary or warehouse. This memorandum shall be on a form approved by the
Authority, and be updated at least once per year.
102
333-162-1005 Civil Penalties
(1) The Authority or a local public health authority may impose civil penalties on any person for the following willful
violations:
(a) Operation of a mobile food unit, commissary, or warehouse without a current license to do so from the Authority or
local public health authority;
(b) Failure to cease operation of a mobile food unit, commissary, or warehouse that has been closed due to uncorrected
priority item violations. This authority shall be limited to those priority item violations identified as creating an imminent
or present danger to public health and defined in OAR 333-150-0000 Section 1-201.10(B).
(2) For the purposes of section (1) of this rule, the term 'willful' means intentional or deliberate.
(3) The maximum civil penalty for each of the violations listed in section (1) of this rule is $500 per day of violation.
(4) Civil penalties shall be imposed in the manner provided by ORS chapter 183 or the equivalent.
103
ANNEX
104
105
106
INSPECTIONAL GUIDE
107
Chapter 2: Management and Personnel 3-302.13 Pasteurized Eggs, Certain Recipes. 07B P 28
SUPERVISION 3-302.14 Unapproved Additives 01O P 25
2-101.11 Assignment of Responsibility 00A Pf 1 3-302.15 Washing Fruits and Vegetables 08B C 40
2-102.11(A)(B)(C)(1)(4-16) DOK 00B Pf 1 Contamination from Ice Used as a Coolant
2-102.11(C)(2)(3)(17) DOK, Illness 00B Pf 2 3-303.11 Exterior Ice Prohibited Ingredient 08C P 37
2-103.11(B)(L) PIC Duties 42L Pf 1 3-303.12 Food in Contact with Water or Ice 08D C 37
EMPLOYEE HEALTH Contamination from Equip./Utensils/Linens
2-201.11(A)(C) Resp. of PIC, Reporting 11 P 2 3-304.11 Food Contact with Soiled Items 20A P 13
2-201.11(B) Resp. of PIC, Notification 11 Pf 2 3-304.12 In-Use Uten./Between-Use Storage 10A C 41
2-201.12 Exclusions and Restrictions 11A P 3 3.304.13 Linens and Napkins, Use Limitation 08E C 37
2-201.13 Removal of Excl. and Restrictions 11B P 3 3-304.14 Wiping Cloths, Use Limitation 21A C 39
PERSONAL CLEANLINESS 3-304.15(A) Gloves, Use Limitation 09B P 13
Hands and Arms 3-304.15(B)(D)(E) Gloves, Use Limit., Design 09B C 44
2-301.11 Clean Condition 12A P 6 3-304.16 Clean Tableware for Second Portions 08F C 45
2-301.12 Cleaning Procedure 12B P 6 3-304.17 Refilling Returnables 08G C 45
2-301.13 Double Handwashing 12C P 6 Contamination from the Premises
2-301.14 When to Wash 12D P 6 3-305.11 Food Storage 08H C 37
2-301.15 Where to Wash 13A Pf 6 3-305.12 Food Storage, Prohibited Areas 08I C 37
2-301.16 Hand Antiseptics 13B Pf 6 3-305.13 Vended Food, Original Container 60A C 0
2-302.11 Fingernail Maintenance 13C Pf 38 3-305.14 Food Preparation 08J C 37
2-303.11 Jewelry Prohibitions 13D C 38 Contamination from Consumers
2-304.11 Outer Clothing Cleanliness 13E C 38 3-306.11 Food Display 08K Pf 37
HYGIENIC PRACTICES 3-306.12(A) Condiments, Protection 08L Pf 37
2-401.11 Eating, Drinking, or Using Tobacco 12E Pf 4 3-306.12(B) Condiments, Protection, Vending 60B Pf 0
2-401.12 Discharges, Eye, Nose, Mouth 11D Pf 5 3-306.13(A) Con. Self-Service Op., Raw Meat 07C P 13
2-402.11 Hair Restraint Effectiveness 13F C 38 3-306.13(B)(C) Consumer Self-Service Op. 10B Pf 37
2-403.11 Animal Handling Prohibition 12F Pf 36 3-306.14 Returned Food/Reservice of Food 07D P 15
Contamination from Other Sources
Chapter 3: Food 3-307.11 Miscellaneous Sources 08M C 37
CHARACTERISTICS 3-307.12 Food Transport, Private Vehicles 08N C 55
3-101.11 Safe/Unadult./Honestly Presented 01A P 11 DESTROYING ORGANISMS PUB. HLTH . CONCERN
SOURCES/SPECIFICATIONS/ORIGINAL Cooking
CONTAINER/RECORDS 3-401.11(A)(B)(2) Raw Animal Foods 03B P 16
Sources 3-401.11(B)(1) Raw Animal Foods, Oven 03B Pf 16
3-201.11(A)(B)(H)(I)(J)(K) Food Law, Source 01B P 9 3-401.12(A)(B)(D) Microwave Cooking 03C C 16
3-201.11 Comply Food Law, Labeling 01B Pf 9 3-401.12(C) Microwave Cooking, 165°F 03C P 16
3-201.11(F)(G) Comply Food Law, Meat/Egg 01B C 9 3-401.13 Plant Foods for Hot Hold 06A Pf 32
3-201.12 Hermetically Sealed Food 01C P 9 3-401.14(A)-(E) Non-Continuous Cooking NA P 16
3-201.13 Fluid Milk and Milk Products 01D P 9 3-401.14(F) Non-Continuous Cooking, Proc. NA Pf 16
3-201.14 Fish 01E P 9 Freezing
3-201.15 Molluscan Shellfish 01F P 9 3-402.11 Parasite Destruction 03D P 12
3-201.16 Wild Mushrooms NA Pf 9 3-402.12 Records, Creation and Retention 02D Pf 12
3-201.17 Game Animals 01G P 9 Reheating
3-201.18(A)(C)(D) Outdoor Cook./Beverage NA Pf 55 3-403.11 Hot Holding 03E P 17
3-201.18 (B)(F) Outdoor Cooking/Beverage NA C 55 3-404.11(A) Treating Juice NA P 27
Specifications for Receiving 3-404.11(B) Treating Juice, Labeling NA Pf 27
3-202.11(A)(C)(D) Temperature 03A P 10 LIMITING ORGANISMS OF PUB. HEALTH CONCERN
3-202.11(E)(F) Temperature, Frozen/Abuse 03A Pf 10 Temperature and Time Control
3-202.12 Additives 01H P 10 3-501.11 Frozen Food NA C 31
3-202.13 Shell Eggs 01I P 9 3-501.12 Slacking 06B C 33
3-202.14 Pasteurized Eggs and Milk 01J P 9 3-501.13 Thawing 06C C 33
3-202.15 Package Integrity 01K Pf 11 3-501.14 Cooling 03F P 18
3-202.16 Ice 01L P 28 3-501.15(C) Cooling, Mobile Units NA Pf 0
3-202.17(A) Shucked Shellfish, Packaging/ID 02A Pf 35 3-501.15 Cooling Methods 06D Pf 31
3-202.17(B) Shucked Shellfish, Packaging/ID 02A C 35 3-501.16 Hot and Cold Holding 03G P 19
3-202.18(A) Shellstock Identification 01M Pf 12 3-501.17 Ready-to-Eat Food, Dating 03H Pf 21
3-202.18(B)(C) Shellstock Identification 01M C 12 3-501.18 Ready-to-Eat Food, Disposition 03I P 21
3-202.19 Shellstock, Condition 08A C 37 3-501.18 Ready-to-Eat Food, Disposition 60C P 0
Commercially Processed 3-501.19 Time as PH Control, Marking/Proc. 03J Pf 22
3-202.110(A) Juice Treated, HACCP NA Pf 9 3-501.19 Time as a Public Health Control 03J P 22
3-202.110(B) Juice Treated, Pasteurized NA P 9 Special Processing Methods
Original Containers and Records 3-502.11 Variance Requirement 00C Pf 27
3-203.11(A) Shellfish, Containers 02B C 35 3-502.12 ROP, Criteria 00D P 27
3-203.11(C)(3) Shellfish, Served Raw 02B Pf 35 3-502.12 ROP, Procedures/HACCP 00D Pf 27
3-203.12 Shellstock, Record Keeping 01N Pf 12 FOOD ID./PRESENTATION/ ON-PREMISES LABELING
PROTECT. FROM CONTAM. AFTER RECEIVING Accurate Representation
Preventing Contamination by Employees 3-601.11 Standards of Identity 02E C 35
3-301.11 Cont. from Employee Hands, RTE 12G P 7 3-601.12 Honestly Presented 02F C 35
3-301.11 Cont. from Emp. Hands, Non-RTE 09A Pf 7 Labeling
3-301.12 Contamination When Tasting 12H P 4 3-602.11 Food Labels 02G C 35
Contamination from Other Foods/Ingredients 3-602.11(B)(5) Food Labels, Allergens 02G Pf 35
3-302.11 Sep/Pack./Segregation, Cross-Cont. 07A P 13 3-602.12 Other Forms of Information 02H C 35
3-302.11 Separation/Packaging/Segregation 07A C 13 Consumer Advisory
3-302.12 Containers Ident./Common Name 02C C 35 3-603.11 Consumer Advisory NA Pf 23
108
Disposition Utensils and Measuring/Testing Devices
3-701.11 Discarding Contaminated Food 01P P 15 4-302.11 Utensils for Consumer Self-Service 10C Pf 45
Chapter 4: Equipment, Utensils, and Linens 4-302.12 Food Temp. Measuring Devices 05E Pf 34
MATERIALS FOR CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR 4-302.13 Wash Temp. Measuring Devices 17F C 46
Multiuse 4-302.14 Sanitizing Solution Testing Devices 17G Pf 46
4-101.11(A) Characteristics, Safe 14A P 45 MAINTENANCE AND OPERATION
4-101.11(B)-(E) Characteristics 14A C 45 Equipment
4-101.12 Cast Iron 14B C 45 4-501.11 Good Repair and Proper Adjustment 15K C 45
4-101.13(A)(B) Lead in Utensils 14C P 45 4-501.12 Cutting Surfaces 14U C 45
4-101.13(C) Lead in Solder and Flux 14C C 45 4-501.13 Microwave Ovens 15L C 45
4-101.14 Copper 14D P 45 4-501.14 Equipment, Cleaning Frequency 16H C 46
4-101.15 Galvanized Metal 14E P 45 4-501.15 Warewasher, Operating Instructions 16I C 46
4-101.16 Sponges 15A C 39 4-501.16 Warewashing Sinks, Use Limitation 16J C 46
4-101.17 Wood 14H C 45 4-501.17 Warewashing, Cleaning Agents 19A Pf 46
4-101.18 Nonstick Coatings 14I C 45 4-501.18 Warewashing, Clean Solutions 19B C 46
4-101.19 Nonfood-Contact Surfaces 15B C 45 4-501.19 Warewashing, Wash Sol. Temp. 19C Pf 46
Single-Service and Single-Use 4-501.110 Warewasher, Wash Sol. Temp. 19D Pf 46
4-102.11(A)(1)(B)(1) Characteristics, Safe 14J P 45 4-501.111 Warewashing, San. Water Temp. 20B P 14
4-102.11(A)(2)(B)(2) Characteristics 14J C 45 4-501.112 Warewasher, San. Water Temp. 19E Pf 14
DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION 4-501.113 Warewasher, Sanitization Pressure 16K C 14
Durability and Strength 4-501.114(A) Chemical Sanitizer, Chlorine 20C P 14
4-201.11 Equipment and Utensils 14K C 45 4-501.114(B) Chemical Sanitizer, Iodine 20D P 14
4-201.12 Food TMD, Glass 05A P 45 4-501.114(C) Chemical.Sanitizer, Quat. Amm. 20E P 14
Cleanability 4-501.116 Determining Sanitizer Conc. 17H Pf 46
4-202.11 Food-Contact Surfaces, Design 14L Pf 45 Utensil/Temperature/Pressure Measuring Device
4-202.12(A)(1) CIP Equipment, Sanitizing 14M Pf 45 4-502.11(A)(C) Utensils Maint. Good Rep. 14V C 45
4-202.12(A)(2)(B) CIP Equipment 14M C 45 4-502.11(B) Repair and Calib., Food/Air 05F Pf 34
4-202.13 "V" Threads 14N C 45 4-502.12 Single-Ser./Use Art., Required Use 20F P 43
4-202.14 Hot Oil Filtering Equipment 14O C 45 4-502.13 Bulk Milk Tube/Single Service Use 26A/08Q C 43
4-202.15 Can Openers 14P C 45 4-502.14 Shells, Use Limitation 14W C 43
4-202.16 Nonfood-Contact Surfaces 15C C 45 CLEANING OF EQUIPMENT AND UTENSILS
4-202.17 Kick Plates, Removable 15D C 45 Objective
4-202.18 Ventilation Hood, Filters 15E C 54 4-601.11(A) Equip. Food Contact Surf. Clean 20G Pf 14
Accuracy 4-601.11(B)(C) Cooking/NFC Surfaces Clean 22A/23A C 47
4-203.11 Food Temp. Measuring Devices 05B Pf 34 Frequency
4-203.12 Air/Water TMD 05C Pf 34 4-602.11(A)(C) Food-Contact Surf./Utensils 20H P 14
4-203.13 Pressure Measuring Devices 17B C 46 4-602.11(E) Food-Contact, Non-PHF 22B C 14
Functionality 4-602.12 Cooking and Baking Equipment 22C C 14
4-204.11 Ventilation Hoods, Drip Prevention 15F C 54 4-602.13 Nonfood-Contact Surfaces 23B C 47
4-204.12 Equip. Openings, Closures/Deflectors 14Q C 45 Methods
4-204.13 Dispensing Equipment, Barriers 14R C 45 4-603.11 Dry Cleaning 42A C 45
4-204.13 Dispensing Equipment, Barriers 60D C 0 4-603.12 Precleaning 18A C 46
4-204.13(E) Dispensing Equipment, Liquid 60D P 0 4-603.13 Loading of Soiled Items, Warewash 18B C 46
4-204.14 Vending Machine, Stage Closure 60E C 0 4-603.14 Wet Cleaning 22D C 46
4-204.15 Bearings and Gear Boxes, Leakproof 08O C 45 4-603.15 Washing, Alt. Manual Equipment 16L C 46
4-204.16 Beverage Tubing, Separation 14S C 45 4-603.16 Rinsing Procedures 16M C 46
4-204.17 Ice Units, Separation of Drains 14T C 45 SANITIZATION OF EQUIPMENT AND UTENSILS
4-204.18 Condenser Unit, Separation 15G C 45 Objective
4-204.19 Can Openers on Vending Machines 60F C 0 4-702.11 Freq., Before Use After Cleaning 20J P 14
4-204.110(A) Mollusk Shellfish Tanks, Disp. 08P P 45 4-703.11 Methods, Hot Water and Chemical 20K P 14
4-204.110(B) Mollusk Shellfish Tanks, Oper. 08P Pf 27 LAUNDERING
4-204.111 Vending Mach., Auto Shutoff 60G P 0 4-801.11 Objective, Clean Linens 44A C 42
4-204.112(A)(B)(D) Air/Water TMD, Location 05D C 34 4-802.11 Frequency, Specifications 44B C 42
4-204.112(E) Food/Water TMD, Scale 17C Pf 34 Methods
4-204.113 Warewasher, Data Plate 16A C 46 4-803.11 Storage of Soiled Linens 44C C 42
4-204.114 Warewasher, Internal Baffles 16B C 46 4-803.12 Mechanical Washing 43C C 42
4-204.115 Warewasher, Temp. Meas. Devices 17D Pf 46 4-803.13 Use of Laundry Facilities 43D C 53
4-204.116 Manual Ware., Heaters/Baskets 16C Pf 46 PROTECTION OF CLEAN ITEMS
4-204.117 Warewasher, Sanitizer Indicator 16D Pf 46 Drying
4-204.118 Warewasher, Flow Pressure Device 17E C 46 4-901.11 Equipment and Utensils, Air-Drying 24A C 42
4-204.119 Sinks and Drainboards/Self-Draining 16E C 46 4-901.12 Wiping Cloths, Air-Drying 24B C 39
4-204.120 Equipment Compartments, Drainage 15H C 46 Lubricating and Reassembling
4-204.121 Vending Mach./Liquid Waste 60H C 0 4-902.11 Food-Contact Surfaces 08R C 45
4-204.122 Case Lot Handling Equip/Move. 60I C 0 4-902.12 Equipment 24C C 45
4-204.123 Vending Machine Doors and Open. 60J C 0 Storing
NUMBERS AND CAPACITIES 4-903.11 Equip./Uten./Lin./Sing.-Ser/Use Art. 24D C 42
Equipment 4-903.12 Prohibitions 24E C 42
4-301.11 Cooling/Heating/Holding Capacities 04A Pf 31 Preventing Contamination
4-301.12(A)(B) Warewashing, Sink Req. 16F Pf 46 4-904.11 Kitchenware and Tableware 25A C 42
4-301.12(E) Warewashing, Mobile Units 70A Pf 0 4-904.12 Soiled and Clean Tableware 24F C 42
4-301.13 Drainboards 16G C 46 4-904.13 Preset Tableware 24G C 42
4-301.14 Ventilation Hood Systems, Adequacy 39A C 54 4-904.14 Rinsing after Cleaning and Sanitizing NA C 46
4-301.14Pf Ventilation, Mobile Units NA Pf 0
4-301.15 Clothes Washers and Dryers 43A C 53
109
Chapter 5: Water, Plumbing, and Waste Retention, Drainage, and Delivery
WATER 5-402.11 Backflow Prevention 30F P 50
Source 5-402.12 Grease Trap 29M C 50
5-101.11 Approved System 27A P 29 5-402.13 Conveying Sewage 30G P 50
5-101.12 System Flushing and Disinfection 27B P 49 5-402.14 Removing Waste, Mobile Units 70T Pf 0
5-101.13 Bottled Drinking Water 27C P 9 Disposal Facility
Quality 5-403.11 Approved Sewage Disposal System 28A P 50
5-102.11 Standards 27D P 29 5-403.12 Other Liquid Wastes and Rainwater 29N C 50
5-102.12 Nondrinking Water 27E P 29 REFUSE, RECYCLABLES, AND RETURNABLES
5-102.13 Sampling 27F Pf 29 Facilities on the Premises
5-102.14 Sample Report, Nondrinking Water 27G C 29 5-501.11 Outdoor Storage Surface 34A C 52
Quantity and Availability 5-501.12 Outdoor Enclosure 34B C 52
5-103.11 Capacity 27H Pf 48 5-501.13 Receptacles 33A C 52
5-103.12 Pressure 29A Pf 48 5-501.14 Receptacles in Vending Machines 60K C 0
Distribution, Delivery, and Retention 5-501.15 Outside Receptacles 33B C 52
5-104.11 System 29B Pf 48 5-501.16 Storage, Areas, Rooms, Receptacles 33C/32B C 52
5-104.12 Alternative Water Supply 27I Pf 29 5-501.17 Toilet Room Receptacle, Covered 32C C 51
PLUMBING SYSTEM 5-501.18 Cleaning Implements and Supplies 33D C 52
5-201.11 Materials, Approved 27J P 49 5-501.19 Storage Areas and Units/Location 34C C 52
Design, Construction, and Installation 5-501.110 Storing Refuse/Recyclables/Return. 34D C 52
5-202.11(A) Approved System, Design 30A P 49 5-501.111 Areas/Enclosures/Recept., Repair 34E C 52
5-202.11(B) Cleanable Plumbing Fixtures 29C C 49 5-501.112 Outside Storage Prohibitions 33E C 52
5-202.12(A) Handwashing Sink, Temp 29D Pf 8 5-501.113 Covering Receptacles 33F C 52
5-202.12(B)(C)(D) Hand. Sink, Installation 29D C 8 5-501.114 Using Drain Plugs 33G C 52
5-202.13 Backflow Prevention, Air Gap 30B P 49 5-501.115 Maintaining Refuse Areas/Encl. 34F C 52
5-202.14 Backflow Prevention Device, Design 29E P 49 5-501.116 Cleaning Receptacles 33H C 52
5-202.15 Conditioning Device, Design 29F C 49 Removal
Numbers and Capacities 5-502.11 Frequency 33I C 52
5-203.11 Handwashing Sinks 31A Pf 8 5-502.12 Receptacles or Vehicles 33J C 52
5-203.11(D) Handwashing Sink, Mobiles 70B Pf 0 Facilities for Disposal/Recycling/Refilling
5-203.12 Toilets and Urinals 31B Pf 51 5-503.11 Community or Individual Facility 33K C 52
5-203.13 Service Sink 29G C 49
5-203.13(C) Service Sink, Mobile Units 70C C 0 Chapter 6: Physical Facilities
5-203.14 Backflow Prev. Device/Required 30C P 49 MATERIALS FOR CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR
5-203.15 Backflow, Carbonator NA P 49 6-101.11 Indoors, Surfaces 36A/37A C 53
Location and Placement 6-102.11 Outdoors, Surface Characteristics 42B C 53
5-204.11 Handwashing Sinks 31C Pf 8 DESIGN, CONSTRUCTION, AND INSTALLATION
5-204.12 Backflow Prevention Device/Loc. 29H C 49 Cleanability
5-204.13 Conditioning Device, Location 29I C 49 6-201.11 Floors, Walls, and Ceilings 36B/37B C 53
Operation and Maintenance 6-201.12 Utility Service Lines 36C/37C C 53
5-205.11 Handwashing Sinks 31D/32A Pf 8 6-201.13 Junctures, Coved/Enclosed/Sealed 36D C 53
5-205.12(A) Prohibiting a Cross Connection 30D P 49 6-201.14 Carpeting,Restriction/Installation 36E C 53
5-205.12(B) Nondrinking Water System, Ident. 29J Pf 49 6-201.15 Floor Covering, Mats and Duck. 36F C 53
5-205.13 Scheduling Device Inspect./Service 29K Pf 49 6-201.16 Wall, Ceiling, Coverings/Coatings 37D C 53
5-205.14 Fogging Device Reservoir/Cleaning 20L P 49 6-201.17 Walls and Ceilings, Attachments 37E C 53
5-205.15(A) System Maintained/Repair 30E P 49 6-201.18 Wall, Ceiling, Studs/Joists/Rafters 37F C 53
5-205.15(B) System Repair 29L C 49 Functionality
MOBILE FOOD UNIT WATER TANK 6-202.11 Light Bulbs, Protective Shielding 38A C 54
Materials 6-202.12 Ventilation System, Exhaust Vents 39B C 54
5-301.11(A) Materials, Safe 70D P 0 6-202.13 Insect Contr. Dev., Design/Install. 08S C 36
5-301.11(B)(C) Approved Materials 70D C 0 6-202.14 Toilet Rooms, Enclosed 32D C 51
Design and Construction 6-202.15(A)(D) Outer Openings, Protected 37G C 36
5-302.11 Enclosed System 29O C 0 6-202.15(E)(2) Outer Openings, Pest Control 37G Pf 36
5-302.12 Inspection and Cleaning Port 70E C 0 6-202.16 Exterior Walls/Roofs, Barriers 37H C 36
5-302.13 “V” Type Threads, Use Limitation 70F C 0 6-202.17 Outdoor Vending Areas, Protection 60L C 0
5-302.14 Tank Vent, Protected 70G C 0 6-202.18 Service Area, Overhead Protection NA C 53
5-302.15 Inlet and Outlet, Sloped to Drain 70H C 0 6-202.19 Outdoor Walk/Drive Surf., Drained 42C C 53
5-302.16(A) Hose, Construction Safe 70I P 0 6-202.110 Out. Refuse Areas, Curbed/Drained 34G C 52
5-302.16(B)-(E) Hose, Construction and Ident. 70I C 0 6-202.111 Homes/Living/Sleep Qtrs., Prohib. 43E P 53
Numbers and Capacities 6-202.112 Living/Sleeping Quarters, Separated 43F C 53
5-303.11 Filter, Compressed Air 70J P 0 NUMBERS AND CAPACITIES
5-303.12 Protective Cover or Device 70K C 0 Handwashing Facilities
5-303.13 Mobile Food Establ.Tank Inlet 70L C 0 6-301.11 Hand Cleanser, Available 31E Pf 8
Operation and Maintenance 6-301.12 Hand Drying Provision 31F Pf 8
5-304.11 System Flushing and Disinfection 70M P 0 6-301.13 Hand. Aids and Devices, Use Rest. 32E C 8
5-304.12 Pump and Hoses, Backflow Prev. 70N C 0 6-301.14 Handwashing Signage 32F C 8
5-304.13 Prot. Inlet, Outlet, and Hose Fitting 70O C 0 Toilets and Urinals
5-304.14 Tank, Pump, and Hoses, Ded. 70P P 0 6-302.11 Toilet Tissue, Availability 32G Pf 51
5-304.15 Water Tank Cleaning/Design NA C 0 6-303.11 Lighting, Intensity 38B C 54
5-305.11(A)(B) Water System Requirements 70Q P 0 6-304.11 Ventilation, Mechanical 39C C 54
5-305.11(C)(D)(F) Tanks Integral/Pressure 70R Pf 0 6-304.11 Ventilation, Mobile Food Units NA C 0
SEWAGE, LIQUID WASTES, AND RAINWATER 6-305.11 Dressing Areas/Lockers, Designation 40A C 54
Mobile Holding Tank LOCATION AND PLACEMENT
5-401.11 Capacity and Drainage 70S C 0 6-402.11 Toilet Rooms, Conv./Accessible 32H C 51
110
6-402.11(E) Toilet Rooms, Mobiles 70U C 0 170-0070 Mechanical Ventilation 50A C
6-403.11 Employee Accomm., Designated 40B C 54 170-0090 Hot Water for Janitorial Purposes 51A C
6-404.11 Distressed Merchandise, Segregated 08T C 37 170-0100 Sleeping Accommodations 52A C
MAINTENANCE AND OPERATION 170-0120 Laundry Facility Separate 53A C
Premises/Fixtures - Methods 170-0120 Laundry Stored Separate 53B C
6-501.11 Repairing 42D C 53 170-0130 Guest Restrooms Provided 54A Pf
6-501.12 Cleaning, Frequency/Restrictions 42E C 53 170-0130 Handwashing Sinks Available 54B Pf
6-501.13 Cleaning Floors, Dustless Methods 36G C 53 170-0130 Employee Restrooms Provided 54C C
6-501.14 Clean. Vent. Sys., Prev. Discharge 39D C 54
6-501.15 Clean. Maint. Tools, Prev. Contam. 12I Pf 53 MOBILE FOOD UNITS
6-501.16 Drying Mops 42F C 53 162-0020(2) Operating Outside Approved Class 71A P
6-501.17 Floors, Absorbent Materials 36H C 53 162-0020(3) Maintained as Approved NA Pf
6-501.18 Cleaning of Plumbing Fixtures 32I C 51 162-0020(4) Designed in One Piece NA Pf
6-501.19 Closing Toilet Room Doors 32J C 51 162-0020(5) Operations/Equipment Integral 72A Pf
6-501.110 Using Dressing Rooms and Lockers 40C C 54 162-0020(6) Seating 72B C
6-501.111(A)(B)(D) Control Pests, Methods 42G C 36 162-0020(7) Auxiliary Storage 72C Pf
6-501.111(C) Controlling Pests, Min./Methods 35A Pf 36 162-0030(1) Mobility 72D Pf
6-501.112 Removing Dead or Trapped Pests 42H C 36 162-0030(2) MU as Restaurant Kitchen NA P
6-501.113 Storing Maintenance Tools 42I C 53 162-0030(3) Catering Prohibition NA P
6-501.114 Unnecessary Items and Litter 42J C 53 162-0030(3)Pf MU Service NA Pf
6-501.115 Prohibiting Animals 35B Pf 36 162-0036 MU at Single Event Temp NA C
162-0040 Base of Operation 71B P
Chapter 7: Poisonous or Toxic Materials 162-0280 Transportation/Cold Plates 72E C
LABELING AND IDENTIFICATION 162-0470 Compressed Gas Bottles 72F C
Original Containers 162-0680(1) Exterior Protection NA Pf
7-101.11 Identifying Info., Prominence 41A Pf 26 162-0680(2) Overhead Protection 72G C
7-102.11 Working Containers, Labeled 41B Pf 26 162-0880(3) Unit Marking/Numbering 72I C
OPERATIONAL SUPPLIES AND APPLICATIONS 162-0880(4) Unit Identification 72J C
7-201.11 Storage, Separation and Location 41C/08U P 26 162-0920(1) Modified after Plan Review NA Pf
Presence and Use 162-0920(3) Menu Change Without Approval 71C P
7-202.11 Restriction 41D/42K Pf 26 162-0920(4) Itinerary NA C
7-202.12(A)(2)(3)(B) Conditions of Use 41E P 26 162-0940(1) Warehouse Use 72H Pf
7-202.12(C) Conditions of Use, Restricted 41E Pf 26 162-0940(4)(5) Warehouse Maintenance 0 C
Container Prohibitions
7-203.11 Poison/Toxic Material Containers 41F P 26 INFORMATIONAL
Chemicals Allergy Awareness 88A
7-204.11 Sanitizers 41G P 26 Employee Illness, 24 Hour Exclusion 88B
7-204.12(A) Washing Fruits and Vegetables 41H P 26 Wild Mushrooms 88C
7-204.12(B) Washing Fruits and Veg., Ozone 41H C 40 Raw Animal Food Freezer Storage 88D
7-204.13 Boiler Water Additives 41I P 26 Non-Continuous Cooking 88E
7-204.14 Drying Agents 41J P 26 Consumer Advisory 88F
7-205.11 Lubricants, Incidental Food Contact 41K P 26 Cut Tomatoes and Cut Leafy Greens 88G
Pesticides Temperature Measuring Device 88H
7-206.11 Restricted-Use, Criteria 41L P 26 Outdoor Food Service 88I
7-206.12 Bait Stations 41M P 26 Outer Openings Protected 88J
7-206.13(A) Tracking Powders, Pesticide 41N P 26 Prohibiting Animals 88K
7-206.13(B) Tracking Powders, Nontoxic 08V C 26 Single Use Plastic Straw Prohibition 88L
Medicines Mobile Unit, Cooling 88AA
7-207.11(A) Necessary Medicines 41O Pf 26 Mobile Unit, Integral Wastewater Stor Tanks 88BB
7-207.11(B) Restriction and Storage 41O P 26 Mobile Unit, Original Design 88CC
7-207.12 Medicines, Refrigerated Storage 41P P 26 Mobile Unit, Auxiliary Storage 88DD
7-208.11(A) First Aid Supplies, Storage 08W Pf 26 Mobile Unit, Exterior/Overhead Protection 88EE
7-208.11(B) First Aid Supplies, Storage 41Q P 26
Priority or Priority Foundation Items 99
7-209.11 Other Personal Care Items, Storage 40D C 26
Repeat Violations 99A
STOCK AND RETAIL SALE
Failed-to-Comply 99B
7-301.11 Storage and Display, Separation 41R/08X P 26
Public Notice of Sanitation 99C
Operating Without a License 99D
Chapter 8: Compliance and Enforcement
P/Pf Items Corrected 99E
CODE APPLICABILITY
Pre-Opening Inspection 99F
Variances
Restaurant Closure, Failed-to-Comply 99G
8-103.11 Document. of Proposed Variance 00E Pf 30
Oregon’s Smokefree Workplace Act 99H
8-103.12(A) Conformance with Procedures 00E P 27
Plan Review Requirements 99I
8-103.12(B) Conformance with Proc., Records 00E Pf 27
Restaurant Closure, Uncorrected P/Pf 99J
8-201.13 HAACP Plan Required 00E C 27
Recheck Inspection for Repeat P/Pf 99K
8-201.14 Contents of HAACP Plan 00E Pf 27
Alcohol and Pregnancy Warning Signs 99L
Increased Inspection Schedule 99M
BED AND BREAKFAST FACILITIES
Fee Required for Re-Inspection 99N
170-0020 Animals in Prohibited Areas 45A Pf
Food Handler Certificates 99O
170-0040 Personal Items Storage 46A C
Clean In Place Procedure 99P
170-0040 Employee Changing Area 46B C
Contents of Plans/Specifications 99Q
170-0050 Dishwasher Instructions 47A C
HACCP Plan, When Required 99R
170-0050 Dishwasher Thermometer Provided 47B Pf
Ceasing Operations and Reporting 99S
170-0050 Mechanical Dishwashing Temp. 48A P
Time as a Public Health Control 99T
170-0060 Food in Directly Connected Sink 49A P
111
Variance Requirement 99U Clean In Place Procedure 99P
Failure to Renew License 99V Contents of Plans/Specifications 99Q
Risk Control Plan 99W HACCP Plan, When Required 99R
Notes/Recommendations 99Z Ceasing Operations and Reporting 99S
Mobile Unit, Handwashing Sink 99AA Time as a Public Health Control 99T
Mobile Unit, Priority/Priority Found. Items 99BB Variance Requirement 99U
Mobile Unit, Closure/Uncorrected P/Pf 99CC Failure to Renew License 99V
Mobile Unit, Operating Without a License 99DD Risk Control Plan 99W
Recheck Inspection for Repeat P/Pf 99K Notes/Recommendations 99Z
Alcohol and Pregnancy Warning Signs 99L Mobile Unit, Handwashing Sink 99AA
Increased Inspection Schedule 99M Mobile Unit, Priority/Priority Found. Items 99BB
Fee Required for Re-Inspection 99N Mobile Unit, Closure/Uncorrected P/Pf 99CC
Food Handler Certificates 99O Mobile Unit, Operating Without a License 99DD
112
INDEX
113
a w, definition, 2 prevention of health hazards, 84
Access public health protection, 84
allowed after due notice, 89 Approved, definition, 2
notification of right, 89 Area
owner agreement, 88 adjacent to easily movable equipment, 5
refusal, 90 behind vending machine kick plates, 47
to premises and records, 89 consumer eating and drinking, 73
Accreditation designated for eating, drinking, tobacco use, 22, 78
equipment certification program, 51 dining, 80
manager certification program, 2 distressed merchandise, 78
Accredited program, definition, 2 dressing, 78, 79
Accuracy, 48 driving, 73, 75
Acidity. See pH dry storage, 74
Additives, food and color dry storage, definition, 4
definition, 2 employee restriction, 91
limitations, 42 exposed, 74
sulfites, 30 food preparation, 74
unapproved, protection from, 30 handwashing sink, 65
Administrative remedies, 92–96 indoor, construction material, 73
Adulterated living, 75
definition, 2 outdoor, construction materials, 73
food condition, 23 outside fenced, 79
Air drying poisonous or toxic materials, 81
equipment and utensils, 60 prohibited food storage, 32
wiping cloths, locations, 60 protected, for tank vent, 68
Air filtration, 68 refuse, 70, 71, 72, 75
Air gap. See Backflow Prevention, Plumbing requiring drip-free ventilation, 48
Air temperature, 56 self-service, 33
Aisles in work spaces. See Spacing separate for raw foods, 29
Alkalinity. See pH servicing, 72
Allergen. See Major food allergen shellfis harvesting, 25
Alligator. See Fish sleeping, 76
Ambient temperature measuring devices, 48 storage, 70–72
Animal foods, raw unaffected by imminent health hazard, 90
cooking requirements, 33–36 underneath fingernails, cleaning, 21
Animal foods, raw or undercooked, consumer vending, 75
advisory, 43 vending machine, 16
Animals walking, 73, 75
commercially raised for food, 25–26 warewashing, 73, 74
exotic species, limitations as food source, 25–26 waste servicing, 70
game, 25–26 where unnecessary persons are not allowed, 19
handling by employees, prohibition and exception, 22 Artificial color or flavor, declaration, 42
handwashing after handling, 21 Assembly, definition, 2
live, prohibition and exception, 79 Asymptomatic, definition, 2
pet dogs, 80 Attachments, wall and ceilings, cleanability, 74
wild game, 24, 25 Authority, definition, 2
Anti-slip floor coverings, 73 Automatic, 49
Appeal Auxiliary storage
denial of application for operating permit, 88 mobile food units, 99
restriction or exclusion order, 91 Backflow prevention
Applicant for permit to operate food establishment air gap, 65
information required, 87 water system operation, 65
qualifications, 87 Backflow prevention device, plumbing system
Applicant, responsibility to report illness, 88 carbonator, 66
Application for operating permit copper, use limitation, 46
notice of denial, 88 design standard, 65
procedure, 87 location, 66
Application of Code numbers and capacity, 66
114
operation and maintenance, 67 CFR, definition, 3
Backsiphonage. See Backflow prevention Cheese
Bacon, slab, storage, 29 datemarking, 39
Bacteria. See Disease outbreaks caused by ROP, 42
Baffles, warewashing machine, 50 Chemicals
Bags. See Single-service articles preservatives, declaration, 42
Bait sanitization of equipment food contact surfaces and
rodent station, 83 utensils, 55, 59
Balut, definition, 2 sanitizers, criteria, 82
Base of operation washing fruits and vegetables, criteria, 82
mobile food units, 100 working containers of, 81
Base of operation, definition, 2 Chicken, raw, immersed in ice or water, 30
Basket, warewashing equipment, 50, 58 Children’s menu, 35
Bearings and gear boxes, leakproof, 49 China utensils, lead limitation, 45
Beef. See Meat Chlorine solutions, chemical sanitization, 55
whole-muscle intact definition, 17 CIP
Beef roasts, cooking requirements, 35 definition, 3
Benevolent Meal Site, 24 equipment, design and construction, 47
definition, 2 Citrus juices
Benevolent organization, 24, 96 raw, at event, 7
Beverage Clams. See Molluscan shellfish, Fish
definition, 2 Clams, lightly cooked or raw, consumer advisory, 43
tubing, separation from stored ice, 49 Cleanability
Birds, dead or trapped, removal, 79 carpeting, 74
Boiler water additives, criteria, 82 ceilings, 74
Bottled drinking water floor and wall junctures, 74
definition, 2 floors, 73
source, 62 food-contact surfaces, 45
Bread wrappers. See Single-use articles mats and duckboards, 74
Buffets, monitoring by food employees, 33 nonfood-contact surfaces, 46
Buildings, physical facilities, 73 studs, joists and rafters, 74
Bulk food utility lines, 73
display, protection, 32 wall and ceiling attachments, 74
Bulk milk container, dispensing tube, 56 walls, 74
Cabinets Cleanable fixtures, plumbing system, 65
storage, 53, 61, 80 Cleaned in place. See CIP
vending machines, 51 Cleaners. See Poisonous or toxic materials
Calibration, temperature measuring devices, 56 Cleaning agents
Can openers handwashing, 76
design and construction, 47 warewashing equipment, 54
maintenance and operation, 54 Cleaning and sanitizing
on vending machines, 49 equipment and utensils to prevent food cross
Cans, number 10. See Single-use articles contamination, 57
Carbonator, 66 equipment for refuse, recyclables and returnables, 71
Cardboard for recycling, outside storage, 71 knowledge demonstrated by persion in charge, 19
Carpeting, restrictions and installation, 74 maintenance tools, stored to prevent contamination, 79
Carry-out utensils. See Single-use articles procedure for employees' hands and arms, 21
Case lot, handling equipment, moveability, 51 ventilation system, nuisance and discharge prohibition,
Casing 78
date marking, 40 Cleaning of equipment and utensils
definition, 3 criteria, 56
Cast iron, use limitation, 45 frequency, 57
Catering methods, 58
definition, 3 Cleanliness, personal, employee
Catsup bottles. See Single-use articles fingernails, 22
Ceilings, coverings and coatings, cleanability, 73 hands and arms, 21
Ceramic utensils, lead limitation, 45 jewelry, prohibition, 22
Certification number for shellfish, definition, 3 outer clothing, 22
115
Clothes washers and dryers water tanks, 67
availability, 52 Consumer
location for contamination prevention, 53 advisory for raw or undercooked animal foods, 43
Clothing, employees, clean condition, 22 clean tableware for refills, 31
Cloths definition, 4
for wiping food spills, criteria, 31 food display, protection from contamination by, 32
for wiping for use with raw foods of animal originfood information requirements, 43
spills, criteria, 31 Consumer advisory, 43
Code Consumer-owned container, refilling, 31
copy provided to permit holder, 88 Consumers at risk, advisory for fully cooked animal
inspection frequency, 89 foods, 43
Code of Federal Regulations, definition, 3 Container prohibitions, poisonous or toxic materials,
Cold holding of potentially hazardous food, 39 82
Cold plate beverage cooling devices, separation from Containers. See Single-service articles
stored ice, design and construction, 49 poisonous or toxic chemicals, use prohibition, 82
Cold plates poisonous or toxic materials, labeled with common
mobile food units, 101 name, 81
Color additive, definition, 2 poisonous or toxic materials, labeling and
Combination food service establishment identification, 81
definition, 3 Contaminated food, disposition, 43
licensing and inspection, 97 Contamination prevention
Commercial warewashing machine, definition, 3 after receiving, 29–33
Commingle, definition, 3 location of equipment, washers/dryers and storage
Comminuted cabinets, 53
cooking fish and meats, 34 Control of foodborne disease transmission by
definition, 3 employees, 91
Commissary, definition, 3 Convenience store
Common name, labeling, 29 definition, 3
Communicable. See Infectious agent Conversion of food establishment
Community or individual facility, for disposal of plans and specifications, requirement, 88
refuse, recyclables and returnables, 72 Cook-chill packaging. See Reduced Oxygen Packaging
Compactor, on site, 71 Cook-chill packaging, definition, 14
Complete Inspection, definition, 3 Cooking
Compliance with code equipment, cleaning frequency, 56–58
applicant for permit, 87 requirements for raw animal foods, 33
responsibility of regulatory authority, 90 to destroy organisms of public health concern, 33–36
Condenser unit, separation from food and food utensils. See Kitchenware
storage space, 49 Cooking unit
Condiments mobile units, 99
protection from contamination by consumers, 33 Cooling
Conditional employee capacity, food equipment, 51
definition, 3 methods to limit growth of organisms of public health
responsibilities, 20 concern, 38
Conditioning device, plumbing system mobile unit, 38
design, 65 potentially hazardous cooked food, 38
location, 66 Copper, use limitation in food contact and fittings, 46
Confection Core item, definition, 4
definition, 3 Correction of priority and priority foundation items
Confidentiality time frame, 89
protecting medical history of employees, 91 Correction of priority and priority foundation
trade secrets, 86 violations
Confirmed disease outbreak, definition, 4 time frame, 90
Construction timeliness, 91
CIP equipment, 47 verification and documentation, 91
floors, walls and ceilings, 73 Corrective action, compliance, 91
food establishment plans, requirements, 85 Corrosion-resistant material, definition, 4
plumbing system, 65 Cosmetics. See Personal care items
utensils and food contact surfaces, 45 Counter guards. See Food display
116
Critical control point refuse, recyclables and returnables, 72
definition, 4 sewage, 70
Critical limit Disposition of ready-to-eat, potentially hazardous
definition, 4 food, 40
nonconformance documentation, 90 Distressed merchandise, segregation and location, 78
violations, timely corrections, 91 Documentation
Cross connection, water supply system, prohibition, 67 correction of priority and priority foundation violations,
Crustacea shells, use limitation, 56 91
Crystal utensils, lead use limitation, 45 freezing for parasites, 37
Cut leafy greens inspection report, 90
as PHF/TCS food, 11 ROP, 41
definition, 4 variances, 85
Cutting surfaces Dollies. See Case lot handling equipment
materials, 47 Doors
resurfacing, 54 common dining area, pets, 80
Data plate, warewashing machine, 50 equipment maintenance, 54
Date marking of ready-to-eat, potentially hazardous refuse receptacle, 72
food vending machine, 49, 51
exemptions, 39 Double Handwashing, 21
hazardous food, 39 Drain plugs for equipment and receptacles for refuse,
Deli tissue, use to avoid contaminating food, 29 recyclables and returnables, 72
Demonstration of knowledge. See Person in charge, Drainage of equipment compartments, 51
Supervision Drainage system, food establishment, design and
Denial of application for operating permit, notice, 88 installation, 69
Design standard, backflow prevention device, 65 Drainboards
Design, construction and installation capacity, 52
equipment and utensils, acceptability, 51 cleanability, 47
equipment and utensils, accuracy, 48 cleaning frequency, 54
equipment and utensils, cleanability, 47 warewashing, self-draining, 50
equipment and utensils, durability and strength, 45, 47 Drains, indirect, 65
equipment and utensils, functionality, 48 Dressing areas
physical facilities, 73–76 designation, 77
physical facilities, cleanability, 73 use by employees, 78
physical facilities, functionality, 74 Drinking by employees, food contamination
physical facilities, mobile water tank and Mobile food prevention, 22
unit water tank, 67 Drinking water
plumbing system, 65 bottled, source, 62
sewage system, 69 definition, 4
Destruction of food unfit for human consumption, 98 Drinking water systems
Detergents. See Cleaning agents approved, 62
Deviations from Code. See Modifications, Variance, flushing and disinfection, 62
Waivers Drinking water, definition, 4
documentation, 90 Drip prevention, design and construction of
Devices. See Physical facilities ventilation hood systems, 48
Dipper wells. See Utensils, in-use storage Driving surfaces. See Surface characteristics, outdoor
Director, definition, 4 Dry cleaning methods, equipment and utensils, 58
Disclosure, definition, 4 Dry storage area, definition, 4
Dish basket. See Basket Drying agents, criteria, 82
Dishes. See Tableware Duckboards, cleanability, 74
Disinfection Dustless methods of cleaning floors, 78
drinking water system, 62 Easily cleanable, definition, 4
Dispensing equipment, design and construction for Easily movable, definition, 5
protection of equipment and food, 48 Eating by employees, food contamination prevention,
Dispensing tube, bulk milk container, 56 22
Display. See Food display Effective date of Code, 84
Disposable towels, waste receptacle, 71 Egg product
Disposal facilities definition, 5
other liquid wastes, rainwater, 70 pasteurized, 27, 30
117
Egg, definition, 5 protection of clean items, 60, 61
Eggs sanitizing, 55
consumer advisory, 43 Escargot. See Fish
cooking requirements, 33 Exclude
pasteurized, substitute for shell eggs, 30 definition, 5
Elderly. See Highly susceptible populations Exclusion of employee
Emergency occurrence. See Imminent health hazard illness, 20–21
Employee. See Food employee, Permit holder, Person infection or disease, 20–21
in charge release, 91
accommodations, location, 78 removal, 91
definition, 5 Exclusion order for infected or diseased employee, 91
designated areas, 78 Facilities
disease or medical condition, 20 assessment for Code enforcement, 84
dressing areas, number, 77 disposal, recycling and refilling of waste, 72
eating, drinking and tobacco use, designated areas, 22 necessary replacement, 88
food contaminated by, disposition, 43 on premises for refuse, recyclables and returnables, 70–
hygiene, 22 72
ill, exclusions and restrictions, 20–21 Facility plans and specifications, submission and
practices, supervision of, 18–19 approval, 85
prevention of food contamination, 29 Faucet, handwashing, 65
Enclosures for refuse, recyclables and returnables, Fee for operating permit, issuance criteria, 87
operation and maintenance, 71, 72 Filter, compressed air, for drinking water system, 68
Enterohemorrhagic, definition, 5 Filtering equipment, hot oil, design and construction,
EPA, definition, 5 47
Equipment Fingernails
air drying, 60 artificial, prohibition, 22
assessment for Code enforcement, 84 of employees, maintenance, 22
case lot handling, 32 First aid supplies in food establishments, storage, 83,
cleaning frequency, warewashing, 54 See Personal care items
cooling, heating and holding capacities, 51 Fish
definition, 5 consumer advisory, 43
design and construction, durability and strength, 45 definition, 5
existing, 84, 88 frozen by supplier, freezing records, 36
fixed, elevation or sealing, installation, 53 other than molluscan shellfish, 36
food-contact surfaces and utensils, cleaning frequency, source, 25
57 Fish, lightly cooked or raw
maintenance, 54 aquacultured, 36
necessary replacement, 88 immersion in ice or water, 30
plans, 85 Fitting or tubing, copper and copper alloys, use
reassembly after cleaning, 61 limitation, 46
repair and adjustment, 54 Fixtures. See Physical facilities
storage, 61 Floor drains, cleanability, 73
storage prohibitions, 61 Floors
Equipment and utensils absorbent materials, use limitation, 78
dry cleaning methods, 58 and floor coverings, cleanability, 73
precleaning, 58 cleaning frequency, 78
rinsing procedures, 58 dustless cleaning methods, 78
Equipment certification and classification, 51 Flow pressure valve, warewashing machine, 50
Equipment openings, closures and deflectors, design Flushing
and construction, 48 drinking water system, 62
Equipment, utensils and linens. See Physical facilities waste retention tank, 70
cleaning, 56–59 Fogging devices, cleaning water reservoir, 67
design and construction, 45 Food
laundering linens, 60 additives, 2, 14, 27, 30, 42
location and installation, 53 characteristics, 23
maintenance and operation, 54 contact with equipment and utensils, 30
materials for construction and repair, 45 contaminated, 43
number and capacities, 51 cooked, potentially hazardous, cooling, 38
118
damaged, spoiled or recalled, storage, 78 Food sources
definition, 6 original containers and records, 28
destruction of organisms of public health concern, 33– Food specifications for receiving, 29–33
37 Food storage
frozen, potentially hazardous, 37 prohibited areas, 32
frozen, storage, 37 Food temperature measuring devices
hermetically sealed, source, 24 accessibility, 52
honestly presented, 1, 23, 42, 84 accuracy, 48
identity, presentation and on-premises labeling, 42 design and construction, 47
in contact with water or ice, storage or display, 30 Food vending, 75
limitation of growth of organisms of public health Food vending, outdoor, overhead protection. See Food
concern, 37–41 establishment
packaged and unpackaged, separation, packaging and Food volume, proposed, plans, 85
segregation, 29 Food, potentially hazardous
packaged, labeling, 42 HACCP plan, 85
protection from contamination, 29–33 hot and cold holding, 39
specialized preparation methods, variance requirement, preparation, application for permit, 87
40, 84, 85 time as a public health control, 40
standards of identity, 42 Food, ready-to-eat, potentially hazardous
temperature and time control, limitation of growth of date marking, 39
organisms of public health concern, 37–41 disposition, 40
vended, potentially hazardous, original container, 32 Foodborne disease
Food allergy, awareness, 19 frequency of inspections, 89
Food Code outbreak, definition, 6
intent, 1 transmission by employees, prevention, 91
scope, statement, 2 Food-contact surface, definition, 6
standards, 2 Food-contact surfaces
title, 1 ’V’ type threads, use limitation, 68
Food contact, copper, use limitation, 46 assessment for Code enforcement, 84
Food contamination cast iron equipment, use limitation, 45
by persons, discarding, 43 construction materials, 45
by unclean utensils and equipment, 30 linens and napkins, use limitation, 31
prevention after receiving, 29–33 lubricating, 61
prevention by employees, 21, 22 sanitization criteria, 59
Food display, preventing contamination by consumers, sanitization methods for equipment, 59
32 wet cleaning methods, 51
Food employee wood, use limitation, 46
definition, 6 Fork lifts. See Case lot handling equipment
Food establishment Forks. See Tableware
definition, 6 Freezing to destroy organisms of public health
does not include, 7 concern, 36
identity information, 87 Frog. See Fish
inspection frequency, 89 Frozen food
not regulated, 7 limiting growth of organisms of public health concern,
Oregon Department of Agriculture, 6 37
Oregon Health Authority, 6 maintained frozen, 37
permit, 87 Fruits, raw
plans and specifications for construction, conversion or cooking, 36
remodeling, 85 washing, 30
temporary, inspection frequency, 89 whole or cut, immersion in ice or water, 30
Food guards. See Food display, See Food display Galvanized metal, use limitation for utensils and food-
Food package, integrity, 27 contact surfaces of equipment, 46
Food processing plant, definition, 8 Game animal
Food processing, variance required, 40 commercially raised for food, 25
Food safety definition, 8
control measures, HACCP plan, 85 Garbage. See Refuse
intent of Food Code, 1 Gauge cock. See Flow pressure valve
purpose of Code, 2 General use pesticide, definition, 8
119
Gloves special requirements, 44
single-use, 29, 31 High-risk populations. See Highly susceptible
slash-resistant, 31 population
Grease traps, food establishment drainage systems, 69 Holding capacity, food equipment, 51
HACCP plan Holding tank. See Sewage holding tank
compliance, responsibility of permit holder, 88 Hollowware. See Tableware, definition
contents, 86 Homes and living/sleeping quarters, private use
criteria, reduced oxygen packaging, 41 prohibition, 75
critical limits, nonconformance, 90 Honest presentation, intent of Food Code, 1
definition, 8 Hood. See Ventilation systems
HACCP principles, failure to demonstrate knowledge, Hot water
90 quantity and availability, 64
Hair restraints for employees, effectiveness, 22 sanitization of equipment, food-contact surfaces,
Hand antiseptics, 22 utensils, 50, 55, 59
Hand drying provision, 76 Hygienic practices of employees
Handling food contamination prevention, 21, 22
kitchenware, 56 Ice
single-service and single-use articles, 56 defined as a food, 6
tableware, 56 exterior cooling, prohibition as ingredient, 30
Hands and arms of employees source, 27
cleaing procedures, 21 storage or display of food in contact with, 30
clean condition, 21 Ice units, separation of drains, design and
hand anitseptics, 22 construction, 49
special handwash procedures, 21 Identity standards for food. See Juice definition
when to wash, 21 Illness of employee, investigation, 91
where to wash, 22 Illness prevention, intent of Food Code, 1
Hands, employees, minimizing contact with food, 29 Imminent health hazard
Handwashing ceasing operations and reporting, 88
cleanser, availability, 76 Imminent health hazard, definition, 8
food employees, 29 Incinerators for solid waste, 72
procedures, special for employees, 21 Individual sewage disposal system, disposal through
signage, 76 approved system, 70
Handwashing facilities Indoor areas, materials, 70
cleanability, 65 Ingredients, HACCP plan, 86
design and construction, 65 Injected, definition, 8
location and placement, 66 In-place cleaning. See CIP definition
operation and maintenance, 66 Insect control
water temperature, 65 devices, design and installation, 74
Handwashing sink, definition, 8 food establishments, poisonous or toxic materials, 83
Handwashing sinks maintenance. See Pest control
automatic, 21 outer openings protected, 75
Hazard Analysis Critical Control Point. See HACCP Insects, dead or trapped, removal, 79
plan Inspection frequency, 89
Hazard, definition, 8 Inspection port, enclosed water system, 67
Health hazard, imminent Documentation, 90
discontinuance of operations and reporting Inspection report
requirement, 90 acknowledgment of receipt, 90
Health hazard, summary suspension of operations, 90 documentation, 90
Health practitioner, definition, 8 issuance, 90
Health status of employee, required reporting, 91 public information, 90
Heat lamp, shield, 74 receipt, refusal to sign acknowledgment, 90
Heater, for manual warewashing equipment, 50 Inspection, preoperational, 86, 88
Heating capacity, food equipment, 51 Installation
Hermetically sealed equipment, 53
container, definition, 8 plumbing, 65
food source, 24 Institutional food service. See Food establishment,
Highly susceptible population highly susceptible population
definition, 8 Integral operations
120
mobile units, 99 Liquid waste. See Sewage
Integral, definition, 8 drain lines, design and construction, 49
Interaction of pH and AW , 11 other than sewage, disposal facility, 66
Interstate Certified Shellfish Shippers List, sources of products from vending machines, 51
molluscan shellfish, 25 Litter, removal, 79
Jars. See Single-use articles Living/sleeping quarters, separation, 75
Jewelry, prohibition exception, 22 Loading soiled items, warewashing machines, 58
Juice Location, grease trap, 69
HACCP plan, 37 Lockers
HACCP system, 28 designation, 77
packaged, 28, 37 location, 78
source, 23 using, 79
treated, 28, 37 Lubricants, incidental food contact, criteria, 82
warning label, 44 Lubricating food-contact surfaces, 61
Juice, definition, 8 Maintenance. See Operation and maintenance
Junctures, floor and wall, coved and enclosed or equipment, storage, 79
sealed, cleanability, 74 refuse areas and enclosures, 73
Justification, variances, 85 tools, cleaning, 78
Kick plates, removable, design and construction, 47 Major food allergen, definition, 9
Kitchenware Management and personnel, 18–19, 20–21, 22
definition, 9 Manual warewashing. See Warewashing
handling, 56 Manufacturers' dating information, 43
Knives. See Tableware Materials
Label, common name on food container, 29 construction and repair, surface characteristics, 73
Labeling mobile water tank and Mobile food unit water tank, 67
compliance with law, 42 Mats, floor, cleanability, 74
packaged food, 29 Maximum contaminant level, definition, 9
poisonous or toxic materials and personal care items, Meat
81 consumer advisory, 43
Lamb. See Meat Meats
Landfills for solid waste, 72 cooking requirements, 33–36
Laundering linens definition, 9
criteria, 60 Mechanical warewashing. See Warewashing
frequency, 60 Medical history of ill employee, 91
mechanical washing, 60 Menu, proposed, plans, 85
methods, 60 Meringue, 30, 44
Laundry facilities mg/L, definition, 9
use limitations, 60 Microwave ovens
Lavatories. See Handwashing facilities cooking, 36
Law, definition, 9 safety standards, 54
Layout, proposed, plans, 85 Milk, fluid and milk products
Lead limitation in ceramic, china, crystal and dispensing tube, 56
decorative utensils, 45 source, 25
Leafy greens, cut Mixing valve, handwashing sink, 65
as PHF/TCS food, 11 Mobile food unit
definition, 4 application for permit, 87
Light bulbs, protective shielding, 74 cooking unit, 99
Lighting, intensity, 76 cooling, 38
Linens definition, 9
definition, 9 handwashing facilities, 65
laundering criteria, 60 modified after plan review, 102
laundering frequency, 60 operated as originally designed, 99
laundering mechanical methods, 60 service sink, 66
laundering methods, 60 sewage holding tank, capacity and drainage, 69
soiled, storage methods, 60 ventilation, 77
storage prohibitions, 61 warewashing, 51
Linens and napkins, use limitation for food-contact water integral operations, 99
surfaces, 31 water system pressure, 69
121
water system requirements, 69 Off-premise
water tank integral, 69 cleaning services for refuse, recyclables and
water tank, inlet, 68 returnables, 71
Catering, 100 delivery and consumption of potentially hazardous
Mobile water tank and mobile food establishment food, application for permit, 87
water tank Oil equipment
capacity and drainage, 69 ’V’ threads, 47
conveying sewage, 70 filtering, 47
flushing and disinfection, 68 Openings to outdoors, protect against insects and
numbers and capacities, 68 rodents, 75
Mobile water tank and Mobile food unit water tank Openings, vending machines, design and construction,
design and construction, 67 51
materials, 67 Operating permit, food establishment
Modifications. See Variance and Waivers applicant qualifications and responsibilities, 87
Code application, 84 application contents, 87
conformance with approved procedures, 85 conditions for retention, responsibilities, 88
Modified after plan review unit converted establishment, 85, 88
mobile units, 102 new establishment, 85, 88
Molluscan shellfish nontransferability, 89
commingling, 28 notice of denial of application, 88
consumer advisory, 43 remodeled establishment, issuance criteria, 85
definition, 9 Operating plans and specifications, submission and
original container, requirements, 28 approval, 85
packaging and identification, 27 Operating procedures, standard
source, 25 HACCP, 86
Molluscan shellstock plans, 85
condition on receipt, 28 Operation and maintenance
identification specifications, 27 physical facilities, 78
Mollusk. See Fish plumbing system, 67
Mollusk shells, use limitation, 56 resumption after suspension, 91
Mops, drying, 78 sewage system, 70
Mouthwash. See Personal care items suspension for imminent health hazard, 88
Moveability, case lot handling equipment, 51 Organisms of public health concern
Multiuse utensils and food-contact surfaces, destruction, 33–37
construction materials, characteristics, 45 growth limitation, 37–41
Mussels. See Molluscan shellfish Outdoor areas, materials, 73
consumer advisory, 43 Outdoor beverage dispensing
National Shellfish Sanitation Program immediate vicinity and enclosure, 26
certification number, 3 Outdoor beverage dispensing operation, definition, 10
Non potentially hazardous foods at an event Outdoor cooking operation, definition, 10
exempt, 7 Outdoor refuse areas, curbed and graded to drain, 75
Nonconformance with Code, documentation, 90 Outdoor walking and driving surfaces, graded to
Non-continuous cooking drain, 73
criteria, 36 Outside receptacles for, recyclables and returnables,
definition, 9 design and construction, 71
Nondrinking water, quality, 63 Outside storage or refuse, recyclables and returnables,
Nonfood-contact surfaces prohibitions, 71
cleaning criteria, 58 Oven
design and construction, 46, 47 microwave, 36, 54, 58
Norovirus Overhead protection for outdoor food vending and
employee illness, 20 servicing areas, 75
restriction/exclusion, 20 Overwraps, colored, for food, limitations, 42
Notice of denial of application for operating permit, 88 Ownership change, operating permit, 88
Odors Oysters. See Molluscan shellfish
mechanical ventilation, 77 consumer advisory, 43
multiuse equipment materials, 45 Package integrity, 27
refuse removal frequency, 72 Packaged food
single-service/use article materials, 46 labels, compliance with law, 42
122
separation and segregation from unpackaged food, 29 maintenance and operation, 78–79
Packaged, definition, 10 materials for construction and repair, 73
Packaging minimize attractants and contaminants on floors, 78
conditions not requiring a variance, 41 numbers and capacities, 76–77
Packaging and identificaiton of shucked molluscan pests, dead or trapped, removal, 79
shellfish, 27 pet dogs, 80
Packaging, reduced oxygen prohibiting animals, 79
HACCP plan and variance criteria, 41 repairing, 78
Pallets. See Case lot handling equipment storage of maintenance tools, 79
Parasite destruction in fish by freezing, 36 toilet room doors, closing, 79
Parts per million. See mg/L Pickle barrels. See Single-use articles
Patrol dogs, 22 Pinning. See Injected, definition
Permit holder agreement. See Employee Plans and specifications for food establishment
definition, 10 contents, 85
posting in food establishment, responsibility, 88 facility and operating, requirement, 85
replacement of facilities or equipment, 84 issuance criteria for operating permit, 88
responsibilities for permit retention, 88 Plastic straw,
Permit renewal, existing food establishment, 88 definition, 15
Permit to operate, 87–89 Plastic straw, use limitation, 56
Permit, definition, 10 Plastic tubs, buckets. See Single-use articles
Person in charge, 18–19 Plates. See Tableware
duties, 19 Plumbing fixture, definition, 10
Person in charge, definition, 10 Plumbing system
Person, definition, 10 air gap, 65
Personal care items backflow prevention, 66
first aid supplies, storage, 83 conditioning device, design, 65
in food establishments, storage, 83 construction, 65
labeling and identification, 81 definition, 10
operational supplies and applications, 81–83 design, 65
stock and retail sale, 83 device, water system, inspection and service, 65
Personal care items, definition, 10 handwashing sink, design and construction, 65
Personal chef installation, 65
exempt, 7 location and placement, 66
Personal chef, definition, 10 materials, 65
Personal cleanliness, 21–22 numbers and capacities, 65
Personal medications. See Medicines operation and maintenance, 66
Personnel, supervision, 18–19 Poisonous or toxic materials. See Personal care items
Pest control, 79, See Insect control and Rodent control bait stations, 83
outer openings protected, 75 boiler water additives, criteria, 82
Pesticides in food establishments chemical sanitizers for washing fruits and vegetables,
bait stations, 83 criteria, 82
conditions of use, 82 chemical sanitizers, criteria, 82
restricted use pesticide, criteria, 83 common name, 81
tracking powders, 83 containers, prohibition for food use, 82
Pests, dead or trapped, removal, 79 definition, 10
Pet dogs in food service establishments, 80 drying agents, criteria, 82
pH in food establishments, use conditions, 82
definition, 10 lubricants, incidental food contact, criteria, 82
Physical facilites tracking powder, 83
location and placement, 77–78 Pork. See Meat
Physical facilities Potable water. See Drinking water
controlling pests, 79 Potentially Hazardous, definition, 11
definition, 10 Poultry, definition, 12
design, construction and installation, 73–76 Precleaning equipment and utensils, 58
dressing rooms and lockers, using, 79 Premises. See Physical facilities
drying mops, 78 definition, 12
handwashing lavatories, maintaining and using, 79 maintenance, 79
maintaining premises, 79 Preparation, definition, 12
123
Presentation of food, 42 raw fish, freezing, 36
Preset tableware, handling, 61 water system service schedule, 67
Pressure spray, wet cleaning, 58 Recyclables. See Refuse
Pressure, water, 64 Recycling facilities, 70
Prevention device Redeeming machines, location, 71
copper, use limitation, 46 Reduced oxygen packaging
design standard, 65 HACCP plan and variance criteria, 41
numbers and capacity, 66, 65–67 Reduced oxygen packaging, definition, 13
operation and maintenance, 67 Refilling
Primal cut clean tableware, 31
definition, 12 Refrigeration, cooling and cold holding, 39
Priority foundation item, definition, 12 Refusal to sign acknowledgement of inspection report
Priority item, definition, 12 receipt, 90
Private home Refuse areas and enclosures, maintenance, 72
approved source, 24 Refuse, definition, 14
food operations prohibited, 75 Refuse, recyclables and returnables
Private vehicle for food deliveries, 33 cleaning implements and supplies, 71
Privately donated food, benevolent organizations, 24 design and construction, 70
Probe-type price and identification tags, 16 facilities for disposal and recycling, 72
Public health protection, Code application, 84 indoor storage area, design, 70
Public information, inspection report, 90 location, 71
Public sewage treatment plant, disposal through outdoor enclosure, design and construction, 70
approved facility, 70 outdoor storage areas, construction materials, 71
Public water system, definition, 13 outdoor storage surface, design and construction, 70
Quarterly sampling, definition, 13 removal, 72
Racks storage areas, equipment/receptacles, location, 71
case lot handling, 51 storage areas, rooms, capacity and availability, 71
warewasher, 52, 58 storage prohibitions, 71
Rainwater. See Sewage storage, operation and maintenance, 71
Rainwater, disposal facility, 70 toilet room receptacle, covered, 71
Rapid Regulatory authority
reheating, 37 definition, 14
Ratite, definition, 13 responsibilities of permit issuance, 84
Ratites Reheating
not game animal, 8 hot holding, temperature requirements, 37
Raw-to-finish, definition, 13 Reminder, definition, 14
Ready-to-eat food Remodeling of food establishment, plans and
potentially hazardous food, date marking and specifications, requirement, 85
disposition, 39 Removal, refuse, recyclables and returnables, 72
Ready-to-eat food, definition, 13 Repeat violation, definition, 14
Reassembly of equipment after cleaning, 61 Reporting disease, medical condition
Receptacles for refuse, recyclables and returnables by permit holder, 88
capacity and availability, 71 Reporting, imminent health hazard by permit holder,
cleaning, 72 88
covering, 71, 72 Reservice of unopened packaged food and unused
design and construction, 71 food, prohibition, 33, 44
drain plugs, 72 Re-service, definition, 14
equipment and storage, 71 Responsibilities
location, 70 permit holder for ceasing operations, 90
maintaining, 72 permit holder for permit retention, 88
Receptacles for removal of refuse, recyclables and regulatory authority for permit issuance, 88
returnables, 71 Restrict, definition, 14
Recheck inspection, definition, 13 Restricted use pesticide, definition, 14
Records Restriction
availability, responsibility of permit holder, 88 infected or diseased employee, 91
HACCP, 86 Restriction order
HACCP plan conformance, 85 for infected or diseased employee, 91
HACCP plan conformance, failure to demonstrate, 90 service, 91
124
Restrictions definition, 15
ill employees, 20–21 disposal system, approved, desgin and construction, 70
Resumption of operations, 91 disposal, conveying, 70
Retention tank. See Sewage, holding tank holding tank, mobile, 69
Returnables. See Refuse Sewage, other liquid wastes and rainwater
refilling, 31 backflow prevention, 69
Rhea. See Ratites conveying, 70
Right of appeal, denial of application for operating disposal facility, 70
permit, 88 drainage, 70
Rinsing procedures, equipment and utensils, 59 establishment drainage system, design and installation,
Roasts, beef and pork 69
minimum holding times for cooking, 35 holding tank, mobile, 69
oven parameters for cooking, 35 removal from Mobile food units, 70
reheating for hot holding, 37 retention, 70
Rodent control, 79 Shatterproof bulbs. See Light bulbs, protective
in food service establishments, poisonous or toxic shielding
materials, 81 Shellfish control authority, definition, 15
outer openings protected, 75 Shellfish, molluscan. See Molluscan shellfish
Rodents, dead or trapped, removal, 79 Shells, use limitation, 56
Roe. See Fish Shellstock
Roofs, protective barrier, 75 definition, 15
Rooms. See Physical facilities maintaining identification, 27, 28
Safe material, definition, 14 Shielding, light, 74
Sample report, private water system, 64 Shiga toxin-producing E. coli, definition, 15
Sample, definition, 14 Shucked shellfish, definition, 15
Sampling, water, nonpublic system, 64 Single-service and single-use articles
Sanitization. See Poisonous or toxic materials construction materials, characteristics, 46
chemical, manual, 55 definition, 15
chemical, warewashing equipment, 55 required use, 56
definition, 14 reuse limitation, 56
hot water, manual, 50, 55 Sink compartment, manual warewashing, 50, 51
hot water, warewashing equipment, 55 Sink, handwashing. See Handwashing facilities
pressure, mechanical warewashing equipment, 55 Sinks, warewashing
Sanitizing solutions cleaning agents, 54
testing devices, availability, 53 self-draining, 50
Scallops. See Molluscan shellfish use limitation, 54
Screening Slacking
tank vent, 68 definition, 15
Sealed, definition. See Slash-resistant gloves, 31
Self-draining warewashing sinks and drainboards, 50 Sleeping quarters. See Living/sleeping quarters
Self-service Smoking. See Tobacco use by employees
clean tableware for refills, 31 Smooth, definition, 15
consumer, protection from contamination, 32 Sneeze guards. See Food display
utensil availability, 52 Sneezing, coughing or runny nose, employees, food
Semi-annual inspection, definition, 15 contamination prevention, 21
Service animals Soap. See Cleaning agents
care and handling, 22 Soiled tableware, handling, 61
definition, 15 Source, approved
handwashing after handling, 21 drinking water, 62
Service sinks food, 23–26
Mobile food unit, 66 shellfish, 25, 27
plumbing system, number ad capacity, 66 Spacing
use limitation, 22 carpet installation, 74
Servicing area counter-mounted equipment, 53
definition, 15 fixed equipment, 53
overhead protection, 75 toxic material separation, 83
Serving dishes. See Hollowware Spatulas, use to avoid contaminating food, 29
Sewage Special handwash procedures. See Double
125
handwashing clean for second portions, refills, 31
Sponges, use limitation, 46 definition, 16
Spoons. See Tableware handling, 61
Spot cleaning. See Floors, dustless cleaning methods preset, handling, 61
Sprouts soiled and clean, handling, 61
as PHF/TCS food, 11 Tag/label for molluscan shellstock
variance requirement, 41 record keeping, 28
Stainless steel. See Smooth, Cleanability, Easily Temperature measuring device
cleanable definition, 16
Standards of identity, 42 Temperature measuring devices
Standards, Food Code, 2 accuracy, 48
Steak tartare design and construction, 47
consumer advisory, 43 food storage unit, air, 48, 50
Steak, whole-muscle intact beef, 23, 35 manual warewashing, accessibility, 52
Steam scale, 52
cleaning equipment, 71 warewashing machines, 50
mixing valve, 65 Temperature, food
ventilation, 77 cooking, 33–36
Stirrers. See Single-service articles cooling, 38
Stitch pumping. See Injected, definition hot and cold holding, 39
Stock and retail sale of poisonous or toxic materials plant food, 36
and personal care items, storage and display, 83 reheating, 37
Storage thawing, 38
auxiliary, mobile food units, 99 Temperature, warewashing
first aid supplies in food establishments, 83 sanitization, manual, 55
food, 32 sanitization, mechanical, 55
food in contact with water or ice, 30 wash water, manual, 54
in-use utensils, 30 wash water, mechanical, 55
maintenance equipment, 79 Temporary food establishment
refuse, recyclables and returnables, operation and application for permit, 87
maintenance, 70 construction materials, 73
soiled linens, 60 definition, 16
Storage areas for refuse, recyclables and returnables handwashing stations, 65
capacity and availability, 70, 71 inspection frequency, 89
designated Test kit for sanitizing solutions, availability, 53
location, 70, 71 Thawing potentially hazardous frozen food,
Storage cabinets, location for contamination conditions, 38
prevention, 32, 53 Thermometer. See Temperature measuring device
Storing food to prevent cross contamination, 32 Threads, ‘V’ type, 47
Straw, plastic, Three compartment sink. See Sink compartment
definition, 15 requirements
Straw, plastic, use limitation, 56 Time as a public health control for potentially
Straws. See Single-service articles hazardous foods, 40
Studs, joists and rafters, cleanability, 74 Time frame, correction of priority and priority
Sulfites. See Additives foundation items, 89
Summary permit suspension, disease intervention Tobacco use by employees, food contamination
measure, 91 prevention, 21
Summary permit suspension, imminent health hazard, Tofu, immersion in ice or water, 30
90 Toilet rooms
Supervision of personnel convenience and accessibility, 77
person in charge, 19 mobile food units, 77
Surface characteristics not integral, 77
indoor areas, 70, 73 numbers, 66, 76, 77
outdoor areas, 70, 73 receptacle for sanitary napkins, 71
Sweeping compounds. See Floors, dustless cleaning Toilet tissue, availability, 76
methods Toiletries. See Personal care items
Tablecloths. See Linens Toilets and urinals, numbers, 66, 76
Tableware. See Single-use articles Tongs, use to avoid contaminating food, 29
126
Toothpaste. See Personal care items Vending machines
Toothpicks. See Single-service articles automatic shutoff, 49
Towels can openers, design and construction, 49
availability, 76 condiments, packaging to prevent contamination, 33
disposable, waste receptacle, 71 definition, 16
Toxic. See Poisonous or toxic materials doors and openings, design and construction, 51
Tracking powder. See Pesticides in food liquid waste, 51
establishments location, definition, 16
Trade secrets, protection, 86 potentially hazardous food, original container, 32
Transport refuse receptacles in, 70
case lot moving, 51 stage closure, design and construction, 49
mobile food units, maintaining temperatures, 101 Ventilation systems
refuse vehicle, 72 capacity, 77
sewage vehicles, 70 cleaning, nuisance and discharge prohibition, 78
soiled linens, 60 drip prevention, design and construction, 48
vehicle, 16 exhaust vents, design and installation, 74
water vehicles, 64 hood, adequacy, 52
Transport vehicle, definition, 16 Ventilation, mechanical, 77
Trash. See Refuse Verification of correction of priority and priority
Tumblers. See Hollowware foundations violations, 91
Turtle. See Fish Vermin. See Insect control, Pest control, Rodent
Unnecessary control
items, 72, 79 Violation, definition, 16
ledges, projections and crevices, 47 Violations, priority and priority foundation
Urinals, numbers, 66 documentation of findings, 90
Utensils inspection and correction, 89–91
air drying, 60 timely correction, 91
cast iron, use limitation, 45 verification and documentation of correction, 91
ceramic, china and crystal, lead limitation, 45 Waivers
contact with food, 30 Code requirements, 84
definition, 16 conformance with approved procedures, 85
design and construction, durability and strength, 45 Walk-in refrigerator, carpeting prohibition, 74
galvanized metal, use limitation, 46 Walking surfaces. See Surface characteristics
in-use storage, 30 Wall and ceiling coverings and coatings, cleanability,
multiuse, construction materials, 46 74
racks, capacity, 50 Walls, exterior, protective barrier, 75
sanitization, 59 Warehouse
storage between use, 30 maintenance, 101
wet cleaning methods, 51 Warehouse, definition, 17
Utility lines, cleanability, 73 Warewashing machines
V threads, use limitation for food-contact surfaces, 47 commercial, definition, 3
Variance data plate operating specifications, 50
conformance with approved procedures, 85 flow pressure device, 50
definition, 16 internal baffles, 50
documentation and justification, 85 loading of soiled items, 58
HACCP plan, 86 manufacturers’ operating instructions, 54
mobile units, 41 sanitizer level indicator, 50
modifications and waivers, 84 Warewashing sinks
rationale, 84 alternative use limitation, 54
requirement for specialized food processing methods, and drainboards, self-draining, 50
40 Warewashing, definition, 17
Vegetables, raw Warewashing, manual
cooking for hot holding, 36 alternative, 58
immersion in ice or water, 30 chemical sanitization, 55
washing, 30 clean solutions, 54
Vehicle, definition, 16 cleaning agents, 54
Vehicles for removal of refuse, recyclables and heaters and baskets, 50
returnables, 72 hot water sanitization temperature, 55
127
sink compartment requirements, 51 system flushing, 62
temperature measuring devices, accessibility, 52 Water supply
wash solution temperature, 54 alternative supply, 64
Warewashing, mechanical system, prohibition of a cross connection, 67
chemical sanitization, 55 Water system device, inspection and service, 67
hot water sanitization temperature, 55 Water system, compressed air filter, 68
mobile food units, 52 Water systems, public and nonpublic, 65
sanitization pressure, 55 Water tank
wash solution temperature, 54 hose, construction and identification, 68
Wash solution temperature, warewashing equipment, pump and hoses, dedicated use, 68
54 vent, protected, 68
Washers/dryers, availability, 52 Water tank cleaning
Washing frequency, 69
mechanical methods, linens, 52 mobile units, 69
times for employees, 21 Water tank inlet/outlet
Waste receptacle for disposable towels, 71 ’V’ type threads, use limitation, 68
Waste retention tank, flushing, 70 hose fitting, protection, 68
Waste, liquid. See Sewage Mobile food unit, 68
Waste, solid. See Refuse sloped to drain, 68
Water Water tank integral
alternative supply, 64 mobile units, 69
distribution, delivery and retention, 64 Water treatment device, 67
hot, quantity and availability, 64 Wet cleaning methods, equipment and utensils, 51
inlet/outlet, protective device, 68 Wet storage. See Storage, food in contact with water
nondrinking, 63 and ice; Molluscan shellfish, tanks
pressure, 64 Wetting agents, 58
quantity and availability, 64 Whole-muscle intact beef
storage or display of food in contact with, 30 consumer advisory exemption, 23
Water activity, definition, 2 definition, 17
Water conditioning device, 65 Wild fresh mushroom, definition, 17
Water pressure Wild mushroom
mobile units, 69 buyer specification, 25
Water quality fresh, definition, 17
sample report, 64 notice, 25
sampling, 64 Wiping cloths
standards, 62 air drying locations, 60
Water reservoir of fogging devices, cleaning, 67 laundering, 52, 60
Water source use limitations, 31
approved system, 62 Wood, use limitation for food-contact surfaces, 46
bottled drinking, 62 Work clothes. See Clothing, outer
capacity, 64 Wrapped food. See Packaged, definition
disinfection, 62 honestly presented, 42
128
